<<<PAGE 28>>>

16

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

Contd...
Thyroid function tests: Refractory depression, rapid
cycling mood disorder. Treatment with lithium, carbamazepine.
Electrocardiogram (ECG): Age>35 years, Treatment with
lithium, antidepressants, ECT, antipsychotics.
HIV testing: Intravenous drug users, suggestive sexual
history, AIDS dementia.
VDRL: Suggestive sexual history.
Chest X-ray: Age>35 years, Treatment with ECT.
Skull X-ray: History of head Injury.
Serum CK: Neuroleptic malignant syndrome (markedly
increased levels).
Toxicology Screen
Useful when substance use is suspected; for example,
alcohol, cocaine, opiates, cannabis, phencyclidine,
benzodiazepines, barbiturates; remember that certain
medications can cause false positive results (for example,
quetiapine for methadone).
Drug Levels
Drug levels are indicated to test for therapeutic blood
levels, for toxic blood levels, and for testing drug
compliance. Examples are lithium (0.6-1.0 meq/L),
carbamazepine (4-12 mg/ml), valproate (50-100 mg/
ml), haloperidol (8-18 ng/ml), tricyclic antidepressants
(nortriptyline 50-150 ng/ml; imipramine 200-250 ng/
ml), benzodiazepines, barbiturates and clozapine (350500 μg/L).
Electrophysiological Tests
EEG (Electroencephalogram): Seizures, dementia, pseudoseizures vs. seizures, episodic abnormal behaviour.
BEAM (Brain electrical activity mapping): Provides
topographic imaging of EEG data.
Video-Telemetry EEG: Pseudoseizures vs. seizures.
Evoked potentials (e.g. p300): Research tool.
Polysomnography/Sleep studies: Sleep disorders, seizures (occurring in sleep). The various components in
sleep studies include EEG, ECG, EOG, EMG, airflow
measurement, penile tumescence, oxygen saturation,
body temperature, GSR (Galvanic skin response), and
body movement.
Holter ECG: Panic disorder.

Brain Imaging Tests (Cranial)
Computed Tomography (CT) Scan: Dementia, delirium,
seizures, first episode psychosis.
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) Scan: Dementia.
Higher resolution than CT scan.
Positron Emission Tomography (PET) Scan: Research tool
for study of brain function and physiology.
Single Photon Emission Computed Tomography (SPECT)
Scan: Research tool.
Magnetic Resonance (MR) Angiography: Research tool
Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy (MRS): Research tool
Neuroendocrine Tests
Dexamethasone Suppression Test (DST): Research tool
in depression (response to antidepressants or ECT). If
plasma cortisol is >5 mg/100 ml following administration of dexamethasone (1 mg, given at 11 PM the night
before and plasma cortisol taken at 4 PM and 11 PM
the next day), it indicates non-suppression.
TRH Stimulation Test: Lithium-induced hypothyroidism,
refractory depression. If the serum TSH is >35 mIU/ml
(following 500 mg of TRH given IV), the test is positive.
Serum Prolactin Levels: Seizures vs. pseudoseizures,
galactorrhoea with antipsychotics.
Serum 17-hydroxycorticosteroid: Organic mood (depression) disorder.
Serum Melatonin Levels: Seasonal mood disorders.
Biochemical Tests
5-HIAA: Research tool (depression, suicidal and/or
aggressive behaviour).
MHPG: Research tool (depression).
Platelet MAO: Research tool (depression).
Catecholamine levels: Organic anxiety disorder (e.g.
pheochromocytoma).
Genetic Tests
Cytogenetic work-up is useful in some cases of mental
retardation.
Sexual Disorder Investigations
Papaverine test: Male erectile disorder (intracavernosal
injection of papaverine is sometimes used to differentiate
organic from non-organic male erectile disorder).
Nocturnal penile tumescence: Male erectile disorder.
Contd...




<<<PAGE 40>>>

28

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

OTHER ORGANIC MENTAL
DISORDERS (DUE TO BRAIN DAMAGE
AND DYSFUNCTION, AND TO
PHYSICAL DISEASES)
This group includes miscellaneous mental disorders
which are causally related to brain dysfunction due to
primary cerebral disease, systemic disease (secondary), or toxic substances.
According to ICD-10, an evidence of cerebral
disease, damage or dysfunction, or of systemic
physical disease, known to be associated with one
of the listed syndromes is required, with a temporal
relationship between development of the underlying
disease and the onset of the mental syndrome, with
recovery from the mental disorder following removal
or improvement of the underlying presumed cause,
and an absence of evidence to suggest an alternative
cause of the mental syndrome (such as a strong family
history or precipitating stress).
If conditions 1 and 2 are present, a provisional
diagnosis can be made; if all four are present, the
certainty of diagnosis is significantly increased.
The following clinical conditions are known to
be associated with an increased risk for these other
organic mental disorders:

Primary Cerebral Diseases
Epilepsy, limbic encephalitis, Huntington’s disease,
head trauma, brain neoplasms, vascular cerebral disease, cerebral malformations.

Systemic Diseases
Extracranial neoplasms (e.g. carcinoma pancreas),
collagen diseases (e.g. SLE), endocrine disease (e.g.
hypothyroidism, hyperthyroidism, Cushing’s disease),
metabolic disorders (e.g. hypoglycaemia, porphyria,
hypoxia); infectious diseases (e.g. trypanosomiasis).

Drugs
Steroids, propranolol, levodopa, methyldopa, antihypertensives, antimalarials, alcohol and other psychoactive substances.

ORGANIC HALLUCINOSIS
According to ICD-10, presence of persistent or recurrent hallucinations due to an underlying organic cause
is required for the diagnosis of organic hallucinosis,
in addition to the general guidelines for the diagnosis
of other organic mental disorders, described earlier.
It is important to rule out any major disturbance of
consciousness, intelligence, memory, mood or
thought.
These hallucinations can occur in any sensory
modality but are usually visual (most common) or
auditory in nature. In many cases, they depend on
the underlying cause. These hallucinations can range
from very simple and unformed, to very complex and
well-organised. Usually the patients realise that the
hallucinations are not real but sometimes there may
be a delusional elaboration of hallucinations.

Aetiology
1. Drugs: Hallucinogens (LSD, psilocybin, mescaline), cocaine, cannabis, phencyclidine (PCP),
levodopa, bromocriptine, amantadine, ephedrine,
propranolol, pentazocine, methylphenidate, imipramine, anticholinergics, bromide.
2. Alcohol: In alcoholic hallucinosis, auditory hallucinations are usually more common.
3. Sensory deprivation.
4. ‘Release’ hallucinations due to sensory pathway
disease, e.g. bilateral cataracts, otosclerosis, optic
neuritis.
5. Migraine.
6. Epilepsy: Complex partial seizures.
7. Intracranial space occupying lesions.
8. Temporal arteritis.
9. Brain stem lesions (peduncular hallucinosis).

Management
1. Treatment of the underlying cause, if treatable.
2. Symptomatic treatment with a low dose of an
antipsychotic medication (such as Haloperidol,
Risperidone and Olanzapine) may be needed.




<<<PAGE 60>>>

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

48

Table 4.9: Phases in Cocaine Withdrawal Syndrome
Phase
I (Crash phase)

Sub-stage
i
ii
iii

II

i

Duration

Clinical Features

9 hours
to
4 days
after discontinuation

Agitation, depression, anorexia,
craving +++
Fatigue, depression, sleepiness, craving +
Exhaustion, hypersomnia with intermittent
awakening, hyperphagia, craving ±
Normal sleep, improved mood, craving ±

4 to 7 days
after
discontinuation

ii
III (Extinction phase)

After 7-10 days of
discontinuation

Cocaine use disorder is commonly associated with
mood disorder, particularly major depression and
cyclothymia.

Treatment of Cocaine Overdose
The treatment of overdose consists of oxygenation,
muscle relaxants, and IV thiopentone and/or IV
diazepam (for seizures and severe anxiety).
IV propranolol, a specific antagonist of cocaineinduced sympathomimetic effects, can be helpful,
administered by a specialist. Haloperidol (or pimozide) can be used for the treatment of psychosis, as
well as for blocking the cardio-stimulatory effects of
cocaine. These must be administered very carefully
by an expert specialist.

Treatment of Chronic Cocaine Use
The management of underlying (or co-existent) psychopathology is probably the most important step in
the management of chronic cocaine use.
The pharmacological treatment includes the
use of bromocriptine (a dopaminergic agonist) and
amantadine (an antiparkinsonian) in reducing cocaine
craving.
Other useful drugs are desipramine, imipramine
and trazodone (both for reducing craving and for
antidepressant effect). The goal of the treatment is
total abstinence from cocaine use.
The psychosocial management techniques, such as
supportive psychotherapy and contingent behaviour

Anxiety, anergia, anhedonia, craving ++
No withdrawal symptoms, increased
vulnerability to relapse

therapy, are useful in the post-withdrawal treatment
and in the prevention of relapse.

AMPHETAMINE USE DISORDER
Though synthesised by Edleano in 1887, it was introduced in Medicine in 1932 as benzedrine inhaler, for
the treatment of coryza, rhinitis and asthma. Later, it
was recommended for a variety of conditions such as
narcolepsy, postencephalitic parkinsonism, obesity,
depression, and even to heighten energy and capacity to work.
Amphetamine refers to a unique chemical which
is basically phenyl-iso-propylamine or methylphenethylamine. It is a powerful CNS stimulant,
with peripheral sympathomimetic effects too. The
dextro-amphetamine isomer is nearly 3-4 times more
potent than the levo-isomer. It acts primarily on norepinephrine release in brain, along with an action on
the release of dopamine and serotonin.
Although still clinically indicated for narcolepsy
and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (and very
rarely for obesity and mild depression), one of the
commonest patterns of ‘use’ is seen amongst the
students and sports-persons to overcome the need for
sleep and fatigue. Tolerance usually develops to the
central as well as cardiovascular effects of amphetamines.
Recently, there has been a resurgence of amphetamine use in USA and Europe, with the availability of




<<<PAGE 88>>>

76

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

Mania represents a reaction formation (Table 17.1)
to depression according to the psychodynamic theory.

Table 6.5: Some Commonly used Antidepressants
Generic Name

Stress
Increased number of stressful life events before the
onset or relapse has a formative rather than a precipitating effect in depression though they can serve
a precipitant role in mania. Increased stressors in
the early period of development are probably more
important in depression.

Cognitive and Behavioural Theories
The mechanisms of causation of depression, according
to these theories, include depressive negative
cognition (cognitive theory), learned helplessness
(animal model), and anger directed inwards. These
concepts are useful in the psychological treatment of
mild (to moderate) depression.
Several other theories have also been propounded
but are currently considered to be of doubtful value
as theories of causation of depression.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
The first step in the differential diagnosis of any mood
disorder is to exclude a disorder with known organic
cause, e.g. organic (especially drug-induced) mood
disorders and dementia (differential diagnosis from
depressive pseudodementia).
The second step is to rule out a possibility of acute
and transient psychotic disorders, schizo-affective
disorder, and schizophrenia.
The third step is to exclude the possibility of other
non-organic psychoses such as delusional disorders.
The fourth step is to exclude the possibility of
adjustment disorder with depressed mood, generalised
anxiety disorder, normal grief reaction, and obsessive compulsive disorder (with or without secondary
depression).
In addition to the main diagnosis, it is also important to look for co-morbid medical (such as diabetes,
hypertension) and/or psychiatric disorders (such as

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.

Agomelatin
Amitriptyline
Amoxapine
Bupropion
Citalopram
Clomipramine
Doxepine
Dosulepin/Dotheipin
Duloxetine
Escitalopram
Fluoxetine
Fluvoxamine
Imipramine
Lofepramine
Mianserin
Mirtazapine
Moclobemide
Nortriptyline
Paroxetine
Reboxetine
Sertraline
Tianeptin
Trazodone
Venlafaxine

Usual Therapeutic
Range (mg/day)
25-50
75-300
150-300
150-450
10-40
75-250
75-300
75-150
30-120
10-20
20-60
50-200
75-300
140-210
30-120
15-45
300-600
150-300
10-40
10-12
50-200
37.5
300-600
75-375

anxiety, panic, alcohol or drug misuse, or personality disorder) on a multi-axial diagnostic system
(Table 1.4).

MANAGEMENT
Somatic Treatment
Antidepressants
Antidepressants are the treatment of choice for a vast
majority of depressive episodes. Some of the commonly used antidepressants with their usual range of
therapeutic dosage are listed in Table 6.5. (Antidepressants are discussed in more detail in Chapter 15).




<<<PAGE 89>>>

Mood Disorders

The usual starting dose is about 75-150 mg of
imipramine equivalent. The clinical improvement
is assessed after about two weeks. In case of nonimprovement, the dose can usually be increased up
to 300 mg of imipramine equivalent.
It should be remembered that it may take up to
3 weeks before any appreciable response may be
noticed. Before stopping or changing a drug, the
particular drug should be given in a therapeutically
adequate dose for at least 6 weeks.
A variety of antidepressants are now available
in the market. Since almost all antidepressants are
equal in antidepressant efficacy and there is no single
antidepressant effective for all depressed patients, the
choice of antidepressant is often dictated by other factors. These factors include cost and ease of availability
of the drug, the side-effect profile of the drug, past
history of response and (any) co-morbid medical or
psychiatric disorders. An individualised choice has to
be made in each patient, keeping these various factors in mind.
Imipramine, amitriptyline and other related drugs
are called tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs). The
newer antidepressants such as selective serotonin
reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) (e.g. fluoxetine, sertraline,
citalopram), mirtazapine, and serotonin norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs) (e.g. venlafaxine,
duloxetine) have very little anti cholinergic side
effects and, hence, are generally safer drugs to use in
elderly patients with benign hypertrophy of prostate.
However, both venlafaxine and duloxetine have been
associated with hypertension and should be used with
care in those with a history of cardiac illness.
The antidepressant dosage is monitored on the
basis of clinical improvement. Routine monitoring
of blood levels is not usually indicated.
For the first, uncomplicated, depressive episode,
the patient should receive full therapeutic dose of the
chosen antidepressant for a period of 6-9 months,
after achieving full remission. It is wise to taper the
antidepressant medication, when the treatment is to
be stopped after the continuation phase.

77

There are three main phases of treatment:
i. Acute treatment (till remission occurs),
ii. Continuation treatment (from remission till end
of treatment), and
iii. Maintenance treatment (to prevent further recurrences).
Maintenance treatment may be indicated in the
following patients:
i. Partial response to acute treatment.
ii. Poor symptom control during the continuation
treatment.
iii. More than 3 episodes (90% chances of recurrence).
iv. More than 2 episodes with early age of onset,
or recurrence within 2 years of stopping
antidepressants, or severe and/or life-threatening
depression, or family history of mood disorder.
v. Chronic depression (> 2 years) or double depression.
About 20-35% of depressed patients are refractory
to antidepressant medication. The management of a
treatment refractory depressed patient is best done
by a psychiatrist, often at a tertiary care centre. These
patients may require one of the following alternatives:
i. A change of antidepressant (Switch),
ii. Combination of two types of antidepressants,
iii. Augmentation with lithium,
iv. Augmentation with T3 or T4,
v. Augmentation with antipsychotics,
vi. Electroconvulsive therapy, or
vii. Use of newer and experimental techniques.
One type of depression, namely delusional depression (depression with psychotic features), is usually
refractory to antidepressants alone. The treatments of
choice in this condition include:
i. An antidepressant with ECT, or
ii. An antidepressant with antipsychotics, or
iii. An antidepressant with lithium.

Electroconvulsive Therapy (ECT)
The indications for ECT in depression include:
i. Severe depression with suicidal risk.




<<<PAGE 156>>>

144

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

iii. Cyproheptadine: This is particularly helpful in
inducing weight gain, decreasing depressive
symptoms and increasing appetite, if anorexia
is actually present. The usual dose is 8-32 mg/
day, in divided doses. However, co-prescription
with SSRIs can interfere with their effectiveness
as Cyproheptadine is a serotonin antagonist.
5. Group therapy and family therapy can be helpful
in psycho-education for the patient and carers/
family about nature of anorexia nervosa and its
treatment. Psycho-education may also include
discussion of current social norms of slimming
and fitness, since there is evidence to suggest that
anorexia nervosa is far more common in countries
with social pressures for slimming, such as USA
and UK. India is indeed quite fast catching up with
similar social pressures.
The prognosis is generally better if diagnosis
is made early, absence of previous hospitalisations
and absence of bulimic episodes. Weight gain and
improvement in mental outlook often precede return
of menstrual function.

Bulimia Nervosa
Bulimia nervosa is an eating disorder characterised
by the following clinical features:
1. Bulimia nervosa usually has an onset in early teens
or adolescence.
2. There is an intense fear of becoming obese. There
may be an earlier history of anorexia nervosa.
3. There is usually body-image disturbance and the
person is unable to perceive own body size accurately.
4. There is a persistent preoccupation with eating,
and an irresistible craving for food. There are
episodes of overeating in which large amounts of
food are consumed within short periods of time
(eating binges).
5. There are attempts to ‘counteract’ the effects of
overeating by one or more of the following: selfinduced vomiting, purgative abuse, periods of
starvation, and/or use of drugs such as appetite
suppressants.

6. No known medical illness is present which can
account for the disorder.
7. Absence of any other primary psychiatric disorder.

Treatment
The various treatment modalities that can be used
include:
1. Behaviour therapy: This is based on providing
positive reinforcements (and at times negative
reinforcements) contingent on the control of binge
eating by the patient. See Chapter 18 for further
details for BT.
2. Individual psychotherapy: See Chapters 17 and
18 for further details.
3. Antidepressant drugs are an important adjunct
to other modes of therapy. A Selective serotonin
uptake inhibitor (SSRI) such as Fluoxetine (in
doses of 20-60 mg) is particularly useful as it can
cause loss of appetite at least in the initial phase
of treatment, along with its antidepressant effect.
The drugs used in the past have included tricyclic
antidepressants such as imipramine, though they
are currently not widely used.
4. Group therapy and family therapy: These methods
are used for psycho-education of patient and
carers/family about nature of bulimia nervosa and
its treatment.

Obesity (Overeating Associated with Other
Psychological Disturbances)
Obesity caused by a reaction to distressing events is
included here. Obesity caused by drugs or endocrinal
factors, or due to constitutional factors is not considered a psychiatric disorder.
Treatment options depend on the underlying cause;
for example, psychotherapy (for present or past psychological distress), antidepressants (for depression),
advice from dietician, drug treatment, or even bariatric
surgery.

Binge Eating Disorders
In binge eating disorder, large amounts of food are
consumed in a relatively short period, followed by




<<<PAGE 179>>>

Child Psychiatry

those who begin with symptoms for the first time in
adulthood.

Treatment
The management of ADD consists of the following
methods:

Pharmacotherapy
1. Stimulant medication: Dextro-amphetamine or
dexamphetamine (2.5-20 mg/day) and methylphenidate (5-60 mg/day) have been traditionally
used. Currently, Methylphenidate is the drug
of choice in the treatment of ADD, with a high
response rate. Methylphenidate is also available
in sustained release formulations which are preferable due to improved treatment concordance
and convenience of once a day dose.
Both dexamphetamine and methylphenidate
act on the reticular activating system, causing
stimulation of the inhibitory influences on the
cerebral cortex, thus decreasing hyperactivity
and/or distractibility.
2. Others: When stimulant medication is not available or is not effective, other drugs can be used
after careful individual consideration of the risks
and benefits in the individual patient. These
include clonidine, tricyclic antidepressants
(such as imipramine), bupropion, venlafaxine,
chlorproma zine, thiorida zine, and lithium
carbonate.
Atomoxetine, a norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor,
may be an alternative for children who do not respond
to stimulants. The usual dose range is 0.5-1.2 mg/kg/
day. Atomoxetine appears to be the drug of choice in
adult ADD.
Barbiturates are contraindicated in ADD as they
increase hyperactivity.

Behaviour Modification
Counselling and Supportive Psychotherapy
Behaviour modification and counselling are very
important in the successful management of ADD and
can be used along with drug therapy.

167

CONDUCT DISORDERS
Conduct disorder is characterised by a persistent and
significant pattern of conduct, in which the basic rights
of others are violated or rules of society are not followed. The diagnosis is only made when the conduct
is far in excess of the routine mischief of children and
adolescents. The onset occurs much before 18 years
of age, usually even before puberty.
The disorder is much more (about 5-10 times)
common in males. In United States of America, about
10% of all male children under the age of 18 have
conduct disorder.
According to ICD-10, there are four subtypes of
conduct disorder:
1. Conduct disorder confined to the family context.
2. Unsocialised conduct disorder.
3. Socialised conduct disorder.
4. Oppositional defiant disorder.
The characteristic clinical features include:
1. Frequent lying.
2. Stealing or robbery.
3. Running away from home and school.
4. Physical violence such as rape, fire-setting, assault
or breaking-in, use of weapons.
5. Cruelty towards other people and animals.
In the more common socialised (group) type of
conduct disorder, the person claims loyalty to his or
her group. The unsocialised (solitary) type is a more
serious disorder with usually a severe underlying
psychopathology. Earlier, the patients with conduct
disorder were called as juvenile delinquents.
Many patients of conduct disorder, especially
socialised (group) type, go on to improve markedly and may lead well adjusted lives. Some others,
especially those with severe symptomatology, have
a more chronic course and may be diagnosed with
antisocial personality disorder (or traits) after 18
years of age.
In addition to the typical symptoms of conduct
disorder, secondary complications often develop
such as substance misuse or dependence, unwanted
pregnancies, criminal record, suicidal and homicidal
behaviour.




<<<PAGE 181>>>

Child Psychiatry

ziprasidone, quetiapine, and sulpiride. Treatment
options are often chosen based on adverse effect
profile of each drug (which adverse effects to avoid).
SSRIs (such as fluoxetine) have been used for the
treatment of co-morbid obsessive compulsive symptoms.
In the resistant cases or in case of severe sideeffects, pimozide or clonidine can be used under
expert supervision. Behaviour therapy can sometimes
be used, as an adjunct.

NON-ORGANIC ENURESIS
Enuresis is repetitive voiding of urine, either during
the day or night, at inappropriate places. This state of
affairs is normal in infancy.
Most children achieve bladder control by the age
of three years. By the age of 5 years, there are still
about 7% of children who wet their bed. Technically,
enuresis is diagnosed only after 5 years of age (and
at least 4 years of mental age).
Enuresis can be either of:
1. Primary type, where bladder control has never
been achieved, or
2. Secondary type, where enuresis emerges after a
period of bladder control (at least one year).
The majority (about 80%) of children with enuresis
have nocturnal bed wetting only. Non-organic enuresis
is more common (about two times) in males.

Aetiology
The exact cause of enuresis is not known. A variety
of factors, which are implicated in its causation, are
largely biopsychosocial. About 75% of children with
enuresis have a first degree relative with history of
enuresis.
The most commonly occurring factors, however,
are psychosocial, such as emotional disturbances, insecurity, sibling rivalry, death of a parent. An organic
cause must be looked for in children with diurnal
enuresis (15% of all cases of diurnal enuresis) and
adolescents with enuresis. The organic causes are
present in about 5% of cases and include worm infes-

169

tation, spina bifida, neurogenic bladder, urinary tract
infection, diabetes mellitus, and seizure disorder.
In secondary enuresis, the age of onset is usually
5-8 years. Enuresis tends to remit spontaneously and
only 1% of children with enuresis continue to have
the disorder in adulthood.

Treatment
The management consists of one or more of the following measures:
1. Restriction of fluid intake after 8 PM, in nocturnal
enuresis.
2. Bladder training during daytime, aimed at increasing the holding-time of bladder. This is carried out
in a step-by-step manner using positive reinforcements.
3. Interruption of sleep before the expected time of
bed wetting. The child should be fully woken up
and made aware of passing of urine.
4. Conditioning devices, which cause an alarm to
sound as soon as the voided urine touches the bedsheet. It is important to check the child’s hearing
before starting treatment. The alarm causes inhibition of further micturition and the child awakens. If
properly used, it is an effective method of therapy.
5. Supportive psychotherapy for the child, parents
and the whole family is often needed.
6. Pharmacotherapy: Drug treatment is usually not
a preferred option for the treatment of enuresis.
The drug of choice in those who need pharmacotherapy has traditionally been a tricyclic antidepressant, usually imipramine (25-75 mg/day). It
probably acts by its anticholinergic effect as well as
by decreasing the deep sleep (stage 4 NREM-sleep)
period. However, there is a risk of sudden death in
some children with the use of tricyclic antidepressants.
It should never be used for children under the age of
6 years.
Intranasal desmopressin has been found useful
in some patients and is a good alternative. The other
drugs that have been used for this purpose include
diazepam, anticholinergics, amphetamines, placebos,
but none have shown a good therapeutic response.




<<<PAGE 194>>>

182

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

of depression. The first tricyclic antidepressant (TCA)
imipramine was used in 1958 by Thomas Kuhn. It was
different from phenothiazines by only a replacement
of sulphur with an ethylene linkage. With this small
structural difference (discovered by chance), imipramine was found not effective as an antipsychotic
but instead quite beneficial in depressed patients.
Since 1958, the number of antidepressants has been
gradually increasing.
Antidepressants have no euphoriant effect when
administered to normal, non-depressed individuals.

Indications
Presently, the indications for the use of antidepressants
include:
Depression
1. Depressive episode (also called major depression,
endogenous depression)
2. Depressive episode with melancholia (with or
without ECTs)
3. Depressive episode with psychotic features (with
antipsychotics or ECTs)
4. Dysthymia (with psychotherapy)
5. Reactive depression (with psychotherapy)
6. Depressive equivalents and masked depression
(sometimes)
7. Atypical depression (e.g. MAO inhibitors)
8. Secondary depression (e.g. in hypothyroidism,
Cushing’s syndrome)
9. Abnormal grief reaction
Child Psychiatric Disorders
1. Enuresis (with or without behaviour therapy)
2. Attention deficit disorder with hyperactivity (in
low doses, after 6 years of age, when stimulant
medication is not available)
3. School phobia (sometimes, in low doses)
4. Separation anxiety disorder (in children)
5. Somnambulism
6. Night terrors
Other Psychiatric Disorders
1. Panic attacks (e.g. SSRIs)
2. Agoraphobia and social phobia
3. Obsessive compulsive disorder with or without
depression (e.g. clomipramine, SSRIs)

4. Cataplexy (associated with narcolepsy)
5. Aggression in elderly (e.g. trazodone)
6. Eating disorders (e.g. fluoxetine in bulimia nervosa)
7. Borderline personality disorder (for treatment of
depressive symptoms)
8. Trichotillomania (e.g. clomipramine; fluoxetine)
9. Depersonalisation syndrome
10. Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD)
11. Generalised anxiety disorder (e.g. SSRIs)
12. Nicotine dependence (e.g. bupropion is used for
treatment of craving)
13. Alcohol dependence (e.g. fluoxetine sometimes
used for treatment of craving)
Medical Disorders
1. Chronic pain (in low doses, e.g. amitriptyline,
duloxetine)
2. Migraine (as an adjuvant)

Classification
Classification and properties of antidepressants
(Table 15.6).

Pharmacokinetics
The oral dose of TCAs is incompletely though adequately absorbed. As they are highly anticholinergic
in nature, they delay gastric emptying and slow gastrointestinal motility. SSRIs are well absorbed from the
gastrointestinal tract.
These antidepressants, much like antipsychotics, are highly lipophilic and are highly protein
bound. Thus they have a large volume of distribution and tend to accumulate in areas with good blood
supply. Like antipsychotics, they are also not dialysable.
Their other pharmacokinetic properties of TCAs
are similar to those of phenothiazines. The half-life
is long, usually more than 24 hours. Although TCAs
can be administered in a single night-time dose, the
routine clinical practice is to prescribe divided doses,
at least in the initial days of treatment, to prevent
accumulated side-effects. The metabolism of TCAs is
by oxidation (hepatic microsomal enzymes) followed
by conjugation (glucoronic acid). The major metabolites of imipramine and amitriptyline (desipramine and




<<<PAGE 195>>>

Psychopharmacology

183

Table 15.6: Classification and Properties of Antidepressants
Drugs

Oral Dose
(mg/d)

Some Common Adverse Effects#
Sedation* Orthostatic Hypotension* Anticholinergic*

I. Cyclic Antidepressants
A. Tricyclic Tertiary Amines
1. Amitriptyline
75-300
+++
2. Clomipramine
75-250
++
3. Dosulepin (Dotheipin)
75-300
+++
4. Doxepine
75-300
+++
5. Imipramine
75-300
++
6. Lofepramine
70-210
+
7. Tri-imipramine
75-300
+++
B. Tricyclic Secondary Amines
1. Desipramine
75-300
±
2. Nortriptyline
75-200
+
3. Protriptyline
15-60
0
C. Tetracyclic Antidepressants
1. Amoxapine
150-400
+
2. Maprotiline
75-225
++
3. Mianserin
30-120
+++
D. Bicyclic Antidepressants
1. Viloxazine
100-300
±
II. Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors (SSRIs)
1. Citalopram
20-40
±
2. Escitalopram
10-20
±
3. Fluoxetine
20-60
±
4. Fluvoxamine
50-300
±
5. Paroxetine
20-40
+
6. Sertraline
50-200
±
III. Serotonin Norepinephrine Reuptake Inhibitors (SNRIs)
1. Duloxetine
60
±
2. Venlafaxine
75-375
+

+++
++
+++
+++
++
+
++

+++
++
++
+
++
+
++

+
++
++

++
+
++

+
++
±

++
++
±

±

±

±
±
0
±
0
±

0
0
0
±
±
0

±
±

±
±

IV. Norepinephrine Serotonin Reuptake Enhancers (NSREs)
1. Tianeptin
37.5
+
0
V. Noradrenergic and Specific Serotonergic Antagonists (NaSSAs)
1. Mirtazapine
15-45
+++
+
VI. Norepinephrine Dopamine Reuptake Inhibitors (NDRIs)
1. Bupropion
150-450
Activating 0
VII. Serotonin Antagonists and Reuptake Inhibitors (SARIs)
1. Nefazodone
200-600
++
+
(withdrawn from market)
2. Trazodone
150-400
+++
±

±
±
0
±
±
Contd...




<<<PAGE 197>>>

Psychopharmacology

It is essential to continue the antidepressant for a
period of further 6 months after reaching remission, in
the first episode of depressive disorder (and for longer
duration in subsequent episodes) to prevent recurrence of symptoms. It is important to prescribe the
antidepressant in the same dose as used for treatment
unless there are adverse effects requiring a decrease
in dose.
Only when adequate doses (150-300 mg
imipramine equivalent) have been administered for
an adequate period (at least 6 weeks) without a clinical response then the drug can be called ineffective
for that patient. Another drug, usually from a different
class or group, or ECT may then be used.

Side Effects and Toxicity
The common side effects of antidepressants with their
management are summarised in Table 15.7.
TCAs are dangerous in overdose; amitriptyline
and dosulepin (dotheipin) are particularly cardiotoxic
whilst lofepramine is the safest amongst TCAs. Clinical features of overdose include agitation, delirium,
paralytic ileus, urinary retention, coma, respiratory
depression, seizures, hyperpyrexia, cardiac arrhythmias, conduction defects, mydriasis, and death. The
lethal dose of imipramine is 1-2 g. (40-80 tabs. of
25 mg imipramine equivalence).
The treatment options in overdose include gastric
lavage/induction of vomiting, activated charcoal for
adsorption, cardio-respiratory resuscitation, treatment
of seizures (if they occur), general supportive care
and symptomatic management. Quinidine-like drugs
are contraindicated whilst antiarrhythmics such as
lignocaine can be helpful. Physostigmine 0.5 mg
IV/IM bolus repeated to a total of 3-4 mg/day may
be used under careful supervision. Coma often reverts
in less than 24 hours, although toxicity lasts for
5-6 days.
Co-prescription of serotonergic drugs (such as
SSRIs) with other serotonergic agents and especially
MAOIs can lead to serotonin syndrome. It is characterised by a classic triad of mental status changes,
neuromuscular abnormalities and autonomic hyper-

185

activity. These include anxiety, agitation, confusion,
clonus (e.g. ankle clonus, ocular clonus), hyperreflexia, myoclonus, rigidity, increased heart rate, tremor,
flushing, hyperthermia and excessive sweating. Death
can occur in severe serotonin syndrome.
Treatment includes discontinuation of the offending drug(s), supportive management and (sometimes)
use of serotonin and histamine antagonist cyproheptadine.

Refractory Depression
About 20-35% of patients do not respond to the
antidepressant therapy. The chief reasons for this
non-response include:
1. Poor drug concordance.
2. Inadequate dosage.
3. Insufficient treatment duration.
4. Low plasma antidepressant levels.
5. Incorrect diagnosis.
Even when these important reasons are excluded,
there still remains a group (15-20%) of depressed
patients who are non-responders or poor-responders.
Such patients should receive a trial of another antidepressant preferably from a different group (e.g. SNRI)
for adequate duration. In case the patient still does not
respond, the treatment of choice of refractory depression is electroconvulsive therapy (ECT), though other
treatment choices (such as lithium augmentation) are
also available.

MOOD STABILISING DRUGS
(DRUGS USED IN PROPHYLAXIS
OF BIPOLAR DISORDER)
These drugs are usually effective in treatment of mania and therefore the word antimanic is often used to
describe them. But as they are effective in preventing
mood swings in bipolar disorder, the better term is
mood-stabilising agent or a prophylactic agent. The
most commonly used mood-stabilising agents include
lithium, valproate, carbamazepine, and lamotrigine,
though there are several other experimental mood
stabilisers such as oxcarbazepine.




<<<PAGE 198>>>

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

186

Table 15.7: Side Effects of Antidepressants
Category and
Side Effect

Probable Cause

Maximum with
(For example)

Minimum with
(For example)

Management

Amitriptyline

Fluoxetine

See table for side effects of
antipsychotics (Table 15.3)

Amitriptyline
Amitriptyline
Amitriptyline
Amitriptyline
Amitriptyline
Amitriptyline

Fluoxetine
Fluoxetine
Fluoxetine
Fluoxetine
Fluoxetine
Fluoxetine

Amitriptyline

Fluoxetine

Amitriptyline
Amitriptyline
Paroxetine

Mirtazapine
Bupropion
Mirtazapine
Bupropion

SSRIs
TCAs
Trazodone

Mirtazapine
Bupropion
Not known

α Adrenergic
blockade

Amitriptyline

Protriptyline
Fluoxetine

2. Tremor and
Other EPSE
3. Jitteriness
syndrome

Serotonergic

Amoxapine

Not known

Adrenergic;
Serotonergic

Imipramine
Fluoxetine

MAOI

4. Withdrawal
syndrome (mild)

Dependence

Imipramine
Paroxetine

Protriptyline
Fluoxetine

5. Seizures

Decreased
threshold

Bupropion
Amitriptyline

Nomifensine
Fluoxetine

A. Autonomic Side Effects
1. Dry mouth
Muscarinic
Cholinergic
blockade
2. Constipation
–do–
3. Cycloplegia
–do–
4. Mydriasis
–do–
5. Urinary retention –do–
6. Delirium
–do–
–do–
7. Aggravation of
narrow angle
glaucoma
8. Orthostatic
α1 Adrenergic
hypotension
blockade
B. Sexual Side Effects
1. Impotence
α1 Adrenergic
blockade
2. Impaired/
α1 Adrenergic
retarded
blockade
ejaculation
3. Anorgasmia

5-HT blockade

4. Priapism

Not known

C. CNS Effects
1. Sedation

Do not use in elderly and in
patients with past history.
Change or stop drug.
See table for side effects of
antipsychotics (Table 15.3)

Cyproheptadine given 1 hour
before, can reverse anorgasmia and retarded ejaculation
caused by SSRIs.

Stop drug; muscular relaxation; sometimes surgical
procedure needed
This side effect may be beneficial; Otherwise decrease
dose. Change drug. Give
single dose only at night.
Decrease dose. Change drug.
This is very common in
first week of therapy. Add
diazepam for first 1-2 weeks.
Tolerance occurs.
Slow withdrawal of drug.
Decrease dose. Change drug.
Contd...




<<<PAGE 200>>>

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

188
Contd...
Category and
Side Effect
2. Severe hepatic
necrosis (rare)
3. Hyperpyrexia

4. Bleeding

5. Hyponatraemia

Probable Cause

Maximum with
(For example)

Minimum with
(For example)

Management

Toxic or
Hypersensitive
Interaction with
tricyclics or
meperidine
Decreased
platelet serotonin

Iproniazid

Tranylcypromine

Not known

Not known

SSRIs

Not known

SSRIs
SNRIs

Not known;
Probably MAOIs

Stop/change drug. Supportive
care; Death rate high.
Stop drug. Keep a gap of
1 week between imipramine
and MAOI. Supportive care.
Change drug. Do not coprescribe other drugs that
increase risk of bleeding;
Gastro-protective drugs such
as PPIs can decrease risk
to some extent in high-risk
patients
Risk higher in elderly; Avoid
co-prescribing other drugs
that cause hyponatraemia
(such as diuretics); monitor
closely

Probably SIADH

Recently, several atypical antipsychotics such as
olanzapine, quetiapine and aripiprazole have been
added to list of drugs used in maintenance treatment
of bipolar disorder. In addition, other antipsychotics
such as risperidone (and the others mentioned above)
are also used as antimanic agents.
Lamotrigine and Quetiapine (and its metabolite
norquetiapine) appear to have particular efficacy for
treatment of bipolar depression. There is a risk of skin
rash with lamotrigine particularly early in treatment
and the risk appears higher with faster escalation of
dose as well as with co-prescription of valproate. It is
therefore important to increase the dose of lamotrigine
very gradually as suggested in the summary of product
characteristics (SPC) and the dose prescribed depends
on other co-prescribed drugs (such as carbamazepine
and valproate).

LITHIUM
Lithium (Li) is an element (Atomic number 3 and
Atomic weight 7) which is the smallest alkali ion.

The element was discovered in 1817 by Arfuedson.
Since then, it has been used for treatment of gout and
for salt replacement in cardiac disease, but its use was
restricted due to fatal toxicity.
It was rediscovered in 1949 by John Cade, for use
in treatment of mania but its potential went unrecognised as it was discovered in Australia. Mogen Schou
in 1957, had to rediscover it yet again before it became
popular as a treatment of mania.

Indications
Although lithium salts are used in treatment of a
myriad of psychiatric and non-psychiatric disorders,
the established indications are only the following
ones:
1. Treatment of acute mania
2. Prophylaxis of bipolar mood disorder.
In addition, the following may also constitute
possible clinical indications of lithium use:
3. Treatment of schizo-affective disorder
4. Prophylaxis of unipolar mood disorder
5. Treatment of cyclothymia


