<<<PAGE 27>>>

Psychiatric History and Examination

The answers may be overly concrete or abstract.
The appropriateness of answers is judged. Concretisation of responses or inappropriate answers may occur
in schizophrenia.

Insight
Insight is the degree of awareness and understanding
that the patient has regarding his illness.
Ask the patient’s attitude towards his present state;
whether there is an illness or not; if yes, which kind of
illness (physical, psychiatric or both); is any treatment
needed; is there hope for recovery; what is the cause of
illness. Depending on the patient’s responses, insight
can be graded on a six-point scale (Table 2.3).

Judgement
Judgement is the ability to assess a situation correctly
and act appropriately within that situation. Both social
and test judgement are assessed.
i. Social judgement is observed during the hospital
stay and during the interview session. It includes
an evaluation of ‘personal judgement’.
ii. Test judgement is assessed by asking the patient
what he would do in certain test situations, such
as ‘a house on fire’, or ‘a man lying on the road’,
or ‘a sealed, stamped, addressed envelope lying
on a street’.
Judgement is rated as Good/Intact/Normal or Poor/
Impaired/Abnormal.

INVESTIGATIONS
After a detailed history and examination, investigations (laboratory tests, diagnostic standardised
interviews, family interviews, and/or psychological
tests) are carried out based on the diagnostic and
aetiological possibilities. Some of these investigations
are described briefly in Table 2.4.

FORMULATION
After a comprehensive psychiatric assessment, a
diagnostic formulation summarises the detailed posi-

15

Table 2.3: Clinical Rating of Insight
Insight is rated on a 6-point scale from one to six.
1. Complete denial of illness.
2. Slight awareness of being sick and needing help, but
denying it at the same time.
3. Awareness of being sick, but it is attributed to external or physical factors.
4. Awareness of being sick, due to something unknown
in self.
5. Intellectual Insight: Awareness of being ill and that
the symptoms/failures in social adjustment are due
to own particular irrational feelings/thoughts; yet
does not apply this knowledge to the current/future
experiences.
6. True Emotional Insight: It is different from intellectual insight in that the awareness leads to significant
basic changes in the future behaviour.

Table 2.4: Some Investigations in Psychiatry
I. Biological Investigations
Medical Screen
Some of the following tests may be useful in screening for the medical disorders causing the psychiatric
symptoms. Some examples of indications are stated in
front of the tests (these examples are not intended to be
comprehensive).
Haemoglobin: Routine screen.
Total and differential leucocyte counts: Routine screen,
Treatment with antipsychotics (e.g. clozapine), lithium,
carbamazepine.
Mean Corpuscular Volume (MCV): Alcohol dependence
(increased).
Urinalysis: Routine screen; Drug screening.
Peripheral smear: Anaemia.
Renal function tests: Treatment with lithium.
Liver function tests: Treatment with carbamazepine,
valproate, benzodiazepines. Alcohol dependence.
Serum electrolytes: Dehydration, SIADH, Treatment with
carbamazepine, antipsychotics, lithium.
Blood glucose: Routine screen (age>35 years), treatment
with antipsychotics
Contd...




<<<PAGE 28>>>

16

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

Contd...
Thyroid function tests: Refractory depression, rapid
cycling mood disorder. Treatment with lithium, carbamazepine.
Electrocardiogram (ECG): Age>35 years, Treatment with
lithium, antidepressants, ECT, antipsychotics.
HIV testing: Intravenous drug users, suggestive sexual
history, AIDS dementia.
VDRL: Suggestive sexual history.
Chest X-ray: Age>35 years, Treatment with ECT.
Skull X-ray: History of head Injury.
Serum CK: Neuroleptic malignant syndrome (markedly
increased levels).
Toxicology Screen
Useful when substance use is suspected; for example,
alcohol, cocaine, opiates, cannabis, phencyclidine,
benzodiazepines, barbiturates; remember that certain
medications can cause false positive results (for example,
quetiapine for methadone).
Drug Levels
Drug levels are indicated to test for therapeutic blood
levels, for toxic blood levels, and for testing drug
compliance. Examples are lithium (0.6-1.0 meq/L),
carbamazepine (4-12 mg/ml), valproate (50-100 mg/
ml), haloperidol (8-18 ng/ml), tricyclic antidepressants
(nortriptyline 50-150 ng/ml; imipramine 200-250 ng/
ml), benzodiazepines, barbiturates and clozapine (350500 μg/L).
Electrophysiological Tests
EEG (Electroencephalogram): Seizures, dementia, pseudoseizures vs. seizures, episodic abnormal behaviour.
BEAM (Brain electrical activity mapping): Provides
topographic imaging of EEG data.
Video-Telemetry EEG: Pseudoseizures vs. seizures.
Evoked potentials (e.g. p300): Research tool.
Polysomnography/Sleep studies: Sleep disorders, seizures (occurring in sleep). The various components in
sleep studies include EEG, ECG, EOG, EMG, airflow
measurement, penile tumescence, oxygen saturation,
body temperature, GSR (Galvanic skin response), and
body movement.
Holter ECG: Panic disorder.

Brain Imaging Tests (Cranial)
Computed Tomography (CT) Scan: Dementia, delirium,
seizures, first episode psychosis.
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) Scan: Dementia.
Higher resolution than CT scan.
Positron Emission Tomography (PET) Scan: Research tool
for study of brain function and physiology.
Single Photon Emission Computed Tomography (SPECT)
Scan: Research tool.
Magnetic Resonance (MR) Angiography: Research tool
Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy (MRS): Research tool
Neuroendocrine Tests
Dexamethasone Suppression Test (DST): Research tool
in depression (response to antidepressants or ECT). If
plasma cortisol is >5 mg/100 ml following administration of dexamethasone (1 mg, given at 11 PM the night
before and plasma cortisol taken at 4 PM and 11 PM
the next day), it indicates non-suppression.
TRH Stimulation Test: Lithium-induced hypothyroidism,
refractory depression. If the serum TSH is >35 mIU/ml
(following 500 mg of TRH given IV), the test is positive.
Serum Prolactin Levels: Seizures vs. pseudoseizures,
galactorrhoea with antipsychotics.
Serum 17-hydroxycorticosteroid: Organic mood (depression) disorder.
Serum Melatonin Levels: Seasonal mood disorders.
Biochemical Tests
5-HIAA: Research tool (depression, suicidal and/or
aggressive behaviour).
MHPG: Research tool (depression).
Platelet MAO: Research tool (depression).
Catecholamine levels: Organic anxiety disorder (e.g.
pheochromocytoma).
Genetic Tests
Cytogenetic work-up is useful in some cases of mental
retardation.
Sexual Disorder Investigations
Papaverine test: Male erectile disorder (intracavernosal
injection of papaverine is sometimes used to differentiate
organic from non-organic male erectile disorder).
Nocturnal penile tumescence: Male erectile disorder.
Contd...




<<<PAGE 42>>>

30

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

ORGANIC MOOD (AFFECTIVE)
DISORDER
According to ICD-10, presence of prominent and
persistent mood disturbance caused by an underlying
organic cause is required for the diagnosis of organic
mood disorder, in addition to the general guidelines
for the diagnosis of other organic mental disorders,
described earlier. It is important to rule out any major
disturbance of consciousness, orientation, or memory.
The mood disturbance can be a major depressive
episode, a manic episode, or a mixed affective episode.
The severity may vary from mild to severe.

Aetiology
Some of the causes of organic mood disorder are
listed below:
1. Drugs:
Mania: INH, Levodopa, Bromide, LSD, Corticosteroids (hypomania), Hallucinogens, Tricyclic
antidepressants, Cocaine, Baclofen, Amphetamines, Bromocriptine, Cimetidine, Procyclidine
Depression: Reserpine, Ethanol, Clonidine,
Methyldopa, Propranolol, Corticosteroids, Antipsychotics (particularly typical antipsychotics),
Cimetidine, Anticancer chemotherapy, Oral contraceptives.
Any drug a depressed person is taking should be
considered a potential factor in the causation of
depressive episode.
2. Endocrine disorders:
Mania: Hyperthyroidism
Depression: Hypothyroidism, Cushing’s syndrome, Addison’s disease, hyper- and hypoparathyroidism.
3. CNS disorders: Parkinsonism, Huntington’s
chorea, PSP (progressive supranuclear palsy;
depression more likely), CVAs (cerebrovascular
accidents; left-sided anterior lesions and rightsided posterior lesions cause depression in stroke),
cerebral tumours, epilepsy (com plex partial
seizures), neurosyphilis (GPI), head injury (mania
more likely), multiple sclerosis.

4. Post-viral illnesses: Influenza, infectious mononucleosis, viral pneumonia, infectious hepatitis.
5. Deficiencies: Pellagra, deficiency of thiamine,
folate, niacin, folate, B12.
6. Others: Carcinoma pancreas (depression), SLE,
pernicious anaemia, temporal arteritis (depression), carcinoid syndrome (mania).

Management
1. Management of the underlying organic cause, if
treatable.
2. Symptomatic management, if the episodes are
severe. For example, for a manic episode, low dose
antipsychotic medication (such as risperidone,
haloperidol, olanzapine) and/or a mood stabiliser
(such as valproate); and for a depressive episode,
low dose antidepressants (such as sertraline or mirtazapine). Antipsychotics are not recommended
in patients who have suffered from stroke and/or
dementia as the risk of mortality is higher.
Pathological laughter and crying (associated
with multiple sclerosis or stroke) can similarly
respond to small dose SSRIs or small dose amitriptyline.

ORGANIC ANXIETY DISORDER
According to ICD-10, presence of prominent and
persistent generalised anxiety or panic caused by an
underlying cause is required for diagnosis of organic
anxiety disorder, in addition to the general guidelines
for the diagnosis of other organic mental disorders,
described earlier. It is important to rule out any major
disturbance of consciousness, orientation, memory,
personality, thought, perception, or mood.

Aetiology
1. Drugs and toxins: Cocaine, caffeine, amphetamines and other sympathomimetics, alcohol and
drug withdrawal, heavy metals, penicillin.
2. Endocrine disorders: Thyroid, pituitary, parathyroid, or adrenal dysfunction; pheochromocytoma;
fasting hypoglycaemia, carcinoid syndrome.




<<<PAGE 91>>>

Mood Disorders

iii. Bipolar depression
There is recent evidence that quetiapine has antidepressant efficacy in bipolar depression.
iv. Maintenance or prophylactic treatment in bipolar
disorder
Recent evidence shows that several atypical antipsychotics such as olanzapine, quetiapine and aripiprazole
can be successfully used in the maintenance treatment
of bipolar disorder.

Other Mood Stabilisers
The other mood stabilisers which are used in the treatment of bipolar mood disorders include:
1. Sodium valproate
• For acute treatment of mania and prevention of
bipolar mood disorder.
• Particularly useful in those patients who are refractory to lithium.
• The dose range is usually 1000-3000 mg/day (the
therapeutic blood levels are 50-125 mg/ml).
• It has a faster onset of action than lithium, therefore, it can be used in acute treatment of mania
effectively.
2. Carbamazepine and Oxcarbazepine
• For acute treatment of mania and prevention of
bipolar mood disorder.
• Particularly useful in those patients who are refractory to lithium and valproate.
• Particularly effective when EEG is abnormal
(although this is not necessary for the use of carbamazepine).
• The dose range of carbamazepine is 600-1600 mg/
day (the therapeutic blood levels are 4-12 mg/ml).
• The use of carbamazepine in treatment of bipolar
disorder has recently declined, partly due to its
potential for drug interactions.
• Oxcarbazepine has a narrow evidence base and its
use in bipolar disorder is quite recent.
3. Benzodiazepines
Lorazepam (IV and orally) and clonazepam are used
for the treatment of manic episode alone rarely; however, they have been used more often as adjuvants to
antipsychotics.

79

4. Lamotrigine is particularly effective for bipolar
depression and is recommended by several guidelines.
5. T3 and T4 as adjuncts for the treatment of rapid cycling mood disorder and resistant depression.

Other Treatments
Psychosurgery is an extremely rarely used method
of treatment and is resorted to only in exceptional
circumstances.
In depressive episode, which is either chronic or
persistently recurrent with a limited or absent response
to other modes of treatment, one of the following
procedures may very rarely be performed:
i. Stereotactic subcaudate tractotomy, or
ii. Stereotactic limbic leucotomy.
In carefully selected patients, the results are
reported to be satisfactory. However, in the current
day and age, psychosurgery is hardly ever considered
in routine clinical practice.

Psychosocial Treatment
Although somatic treatment appears to be the primary
mode of management in major mood disorders, psychosocial treatment is often helpful. These indications
include:
i. As an adjunct to somatic treatment.
ii. In mild to moderate cases of depression.
iii. Certain selected cases.
These methods include (see Chapter 18 for details):

Cognitive Behaviour Therapy
Cognitive behaviour therapy (CBT) aims at correcting depressive negative cognitions (ideations) such
as hopelessness, worthlessness, helplessness and pessimistic ideas, and replacing them by new cognitive
and behavioural responses.
CBT is useful in mild to moderate, non-bipolar
depression and can be used with or without somatic
treatment.

Interpersonal Therapy
Interpersonal therapy (IPT) attempts to recognise
and explore interpersonal stressors, role disputes and




<<<PAGE 99>>>

Other Psychotic Disorders

4. Sudden onset of symptoms.
5. Presence of affective symptoms, confusion, perplexity and/or disorientation in clinical picture.
6. Short duration of symptoms.
7. First episode.

Treatment
1. Antipsychotics are the mainstay of treatment,
and are used to control agitation and psychotic
features. Usually lower doses of antipsychotics
are needed.
However, in the initial stages the patient may not
take oral medication. In such cases, parenteral
administration of antipsychotics (with or without
benzodiazepines such as lorazepam or diazepam)
may be needed.
The first use of parenteral antipsychotics in an
antipsychotic-naive patient should be carefully
considered, as there is a higher risk of neuroleptic
malignant syndrome (NMS) in these patients.
Long-term use of antipsychotics should be preferably avoided in these patients (see Chapter 15 for
further details).
2. ECT may be needed in cases with marked agitation
and emotional turmoil, as well as in cases where
there is a danger to self and/or others.
3. Antidepressants may be rarely needed as adjuvants
in some cases with associated depression.
4. Psychotherapy and other psychological interventions may be needed in cases with associated
stress, as well as for psychoeducation for the
patient and family. Engagement with psychological treatment is usually after the acute episode is
under control and the patient can communicate
his/her fears and anxieties.

SCHIZOAFFECTIVE DISORDER
This is a disorder which lies on the borderland between
schizophrenia and mood disorders. In this disorder,
the symptoms of schizophrenia and mood disorders
are prominently present within the same episode. The
symptoms of both disorders may be present simultaneously or may follow within few days of each other.

87

There are three types described:
1. Schizoaffective disorder, manic (or bipolar) type.
2. Schizoaffective disorder, depressed type.
3. Schizoaffective disorder, mixed type.
The course is usually episodic (particularly in
manic subtype), although a chronic course in some
patients has been described (parti cularly in the
depressed subtype). The prognosis is better than
that in schizophrenia but is worse than that in mood
disorders.
The treatment is with mood stabilisers (such as
lithium or valproate), antipsychotics, antidepressants
and/or ECT, depending on the predominant symptomatology.

CAPGRAS’ SYNDROME
(THE DELUSION OF DOUBLES)
Capgras’ syndrome is a syndrome that is closely
related to delusional disorders and is characterised
by a delusional conviction that other persons in the
environment are not their real selves but are their
own doubles.
It is one of the several delusional misidentification
syndromes, of which there are four types described:
1. Typical Capgras’ syndrome (Illusion des sosies):
Here the patient sees a familiar person as a
complete stranger who is imposing on him as a
familiar person.
2. Illusion de Fregoli: The patient falsely identifies
stranger(s) as familiar person(s).
3. Syndrome of subjective doubles: The patient’s own
self is perceived as being replaced by a double.
4. Intermetamorphosis: Here the patient’s misidentification is complete and the patient misidentifies not only the ‘external appearance’ (as in
the previous three types) but also the complete
personality.
The syndrome is commonly seen in psychotic
conditions with delusional symptomatology, such as
paranoid schizophrenia (most frequently), delusional
disorders and organic delusional disorder.
The treatment consists of adequately treating the
underlying disorder.




<<<PAGE 129>>>

Disorders of Adult Personality and Behaviour

violence or threatening behaviour are common, particularly in response to criticism by others.
The borderline type is characterised by emotional
instability. In addition, patient’s own self-image, aims,
and internal preferences (including sexual) are often
unclear or disturbed. There are usually chronic feelings of emptiness. A liability to become involved in
intense and unstable relationships may cause repeated
emotional crises and may be associated with excessive
efforts to avoid abandonment and a series of suicidal
threats or acts of self-harm, (although these may occur
without obvious precipitants).
The borderline type is also known as borderline
personality disorder (DSM-IV-TR), the characteristic
features of which include the following:
1. Significant and persistent disturbance of identity of
self, e.g. ‘who am I’. There is marked uncertainty
about major issues in life.
2. Unstable and intense interpersonal relationship
patterns.
3. Impulsivity.
4. Unstable emotional responses, with rapid shifts.
Anger outbursts may occur.
5. Chronic feelings of boredom or emptiness with
inability to stay alone.
6. Deliberate self-harm is common in the form of
self-mutilation, suicidal gestures, or accidentproneness.
The term borderline personality disorder currently
includes ambulatory schizophrenia and pseudoneurotic schizophrenia, which were earlier thought to
be subtypes of schizophrenia. Psychodynamically,
splitting is the primary defense mechanism employed
in borderline personality disorder.
There is a considerable overlap between borderline, narcissistic and antisocial (dissocial) personality
disorders (they belong to the same Cluster of personality disorders, i.e. Cluster B). Major depressive
episodes occur commonly in this disorder.
Treatment
1. Psychoanalysis or psychoanalytical psychotherapy.
2. Supportive psychotherapy.

117

3. Cognitive behaviour therapy (CBT) or dialectical
behaviour therapy (DBT) approaches or principles
have been used with some success in treatment.
4. Drug therapy: Antidepressants have been used
with success in certain patients with depression.
Major depressive episode, if occurs, necessitates
antidepressant therapy. Occasionally antipsychotics, lithium, valproate or carbamazepine have
been used when aggression or impulsivity are
prominent.
Drug therapy is not the treatment of first choice
in borderline personality disorder.

Anxious (Avoidant) Personality Disorder
According to ICD-10, the diag nostic guidelines
for anxious (avoidant) personality disorder include
the following features. Clear evidence is usually
required of the presence of at least three of six traits
or behaviours given in the clinical description.
These include persistent and pervasive feelings of
tension and apprehension, belief that one is socially
inept, personally unappealing, or inferior to others,
excessive preoccupation with being criticised or rejected in social situations, unwillingness to become
involved with people unless certain of being liked,
restrictions in lifestyle because of need to have
physical security, and avoidance of social or occupational activities that involve significant inter-personal
contact because of fear of criticism, disapproval, or
rejection.
Associated features may include hypersensitivity
to rejection and criticism. These patients do not enter
into interpersonal relationships unless they are very
sure of uncritical approval. This disorder is an epitome
of what is often called as inferiority complex. Understandably, secondary depression is very common.
Treatment
1. Individual psychotherapy.
2. Group psychotherapy.
3. Behaviour therapy: In particular, social skills
training and assertiveness training are useful.
4. CBT: The focus is on negative thoughts and negative self-appraisal.




<<<PAGE 185>>>

Psychopharmacology

173

Table 15.1: A Brief History of Psychopharmacology
<4000 BC Ayurveda describes treatment of psychiatric patients with sympathy and kindness. The methods of
treatment included dhatura and roots of serpentina plant mixed with oil (ghee).
1853
Bromide used as a sedative-hypnotic.
1869
Chloral hydrate used in the treatment of melancholia and mania.
1882
Paraldehyde used as a hypnotic.
1883
Phenothiazines synthesised during synthesis of methylene blue (Bernthsen).
1903
Barbiturates (barbital) used for sedation in 1903; phenobarbital introduced in 1912.
1917
Malarial treatment for General Paralysis of Insane (GPI) received a Nobel prize (Julius von Wagner
Jauregg).
1922
Barbiturate-induced coma introduced for the treatment of psychoses (Jacob Klaesi).
1927
Insulin-shock treatment introduced for schizophrenia (Manfred Sakel).
1931
First report of successful treatment of psychoses (Ganesh Sen and Kartik Bose from India); using
Rauwolfia serpentina extract (reserpine). Report ignored till Nathan Kline (1958) confirmed the finding.
1934
Metrazol-induced convulsions used for the treatment of psychoses (Laszlo von Meduna).
1936
Frontal lobotomy advocated for treatment of psychiatric disorders (Egas Moniz and Almenda Lima).
1937
Amphetamines used in the treatment of behaviour disorders of children (C Bradley).
1938
Electroconvulsive therapy used for the treatment of psychoses (Ugo Cerletti and Lucio Bini).
1940
Phenytoin used as an anticonvulsant (Tracy Putnam).
1943
LSD synthesised (Albert Hofmann).
1949
Lithium used in mania (John F Cade); did not receive much attention even in Australia.
1950
Chlorpromazine synthesised while making a better antihistaminic than promethazine (Charpentier).
1950
Methylphenidate used in treatment of ADHD, then known as Minimal Brain Dysfunction (MBD).
1951
Lytic cocktail used (Laborit); Chlorpromazine earlier used (as ‘456 ORP’) in artificial hibernation.
1951
Isoniazid (INH) found to have mood elevating properties in patients with tuberculosis. Iproniazid, a
MAOI and a derivative of INH, was later (1958) introduced for treatment of depression.
1952
The revolution in psychopharmacology came with introduction of chlorpromazine (Jean Delay and
Pierre Deniker). The number of admissions in mental hospitals show a sudden decrease after introduction of chlorpromazine.
1955
Meprobamate was introduced as an anti-anxiety agent.
1958
Imipramine, a tricyclic antidepressant (TCA) synthesised by Haflinger and Schindler in the late 1940’s,
was introduced for treatment of depression in 1958 (Thomas Kuhn).
1958
MAOIs (e.g. iproniazid) introduced for treatment of depression (Nathan Kline).
1958
Haloperidol synthesised in Belgium (Janssen).
1960
Chlordiazepoxide used as an anti-anxiety agent in 1960-1961 (Sternbach; Synthesised in 1957).
1966
Valpromide (Valproate) used in bipolar disorder (Lambert).
1968
Pimozide used for treatment of schizophrenia (Janssen).
1967
Clomipramine used in OCD (Fernandez and Lopez-Ibor).
1971
Carbamazepine used in bipolar disorder (Takezaki and Hanoaka) (Synthesized in 1953 by Schindler).
1986
Buspirone introduced in US market as a non-benzodiazepine anti-anxiety agent.
1988
Clozapine re-discovered in US as an effective treatment for refractory schizophrenia (Kane et al)
(Synthesised in 1959). Approved by US FDA in 1990 and introduced in Indian market in 1995.
1990s
Second Generation Antipsychotics introduced in market starting with Risperidone.




<<<PAGE 197>>>

Psychopharmacology

It is essential to continue the antidepressant for a
period of further 6 months after reaching remission, in
the first episode of depressive disorder (and for longer
duration in subsequent episodes) to prevent recurrence of symptoms. It is important to prescribe the
antidepressant in the same dose as used for treatment
unless there are adverse effects requiring a decrease
in dose.
Only when adequate doses (150-300 mg
imipramine equivalent) have been administered for
an adequate period (at least 6 weeks) without a clinical response then the drug can be called ineffective
for that patient. Another drug, usually from a different
class or group, or ECT may then be used.

Side Effects and Toxicity
The common side effects of antidepressants with their
management are summarised in Table 15.7.
TCAs are dangerous in overdose; amitriptyline
and dosulepin (dotheipin) are particularly cardiotoxic
whilst lofepramine is the safest amongst TCAs. Clinical features of overdose include agitation, delirium,
paralytic ileus, urinary retention, coma, respiratory
depression, seizures, hyperpyrexia, cardiac arrhythmias, conduction defects, mydriasis, and death. The
lethal dose of imipramine is 1-2 g. (40-80 tabs. of
25 mg imipramine equivalence).
The treatment options in overdose include gastric
lavage/induction of vomiting, activated charcoal for
adsorption, cardio-respiratory resuscitation, treatment
of seizures (if they occur), general supportive care
and symptomatic management. Quinidine-like drugs
are contraindicated whilst antiarrhythmics such as
lignocaine can be helpful. Physostigmine 0.5 mg
IV/IM bolus repeated to a total of 3-4 mg/day may
be used under careful supervision. Coma often reverts
in less than 24 hours, although toxicity lasts for
5-6 days.
Co-prescription of serotonergic drugs (such as
SSRIs) with other serotonergic agents and especially
MAOIs can lead to serotonin syndrome. It is characterised by a classic triad of mental status changes,
neuromuscular abnormalities and autonomic hyper-

185

activity. These include anxiety, agitation, confusion,
clonus (e.g. ankle clonus, ocular clonus), hyperreflexia, myoclonus, rigidity, increased heart rate, tremor,
flushing, hyperthermia and excessive sweating. Death
can occur in severe serotonin syndrome.
Treatment includes discontinuation of the offending drug(s), supportive management and (sometimes)
use of serotonin and histamine antagonist cyproheptadine.

Refractory Depression
About 20-35% of patients do not respond to the
antidepressant therapy. The chief reasons for this
non-response include:
1. Poor drug concordance.
2. Inadequate dosage.
3. Insufficient treatment duration.
4. Low plasma antidepressant levels.
5. Incorrect diagnosis.
Even when these important reasons are excluded,
there still remains a group (15-20%) of depressed
patients who are non-responders or poor-responders.
Such patients should receive a trial of another antidepressant preferably from a different group (e.g. SNRI)
for adequate duration. In case the patient still does not
respond, the treatment of choice of refractory depression is electroconvulsive therapy (ECT), though other
treatment choices (such as lithium augmentation) are
also available.

MOOD STABILISING DRUGS
(DRUGS USED IN PROPHYLAXIS
OF BIPOLAR DISORDER)
These drugs are usually effective in treatment of mania and therefore the word antimanic is often used to
describe them. But as they are effective in preventing
mood swings in bipolar disorder, the better term is
mood-stabilising agent or a prophylactic agent. The
most commonly used mood-stabilising agents include
lithium, valproate, carbamazepine, and lamotrigine,
though there are several other experimental mood
stabilisers such as oxcarbazepine.




<<<PAGE 200>>>

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

188
Contd...
Category and
Side Effect
2. Severe hepatic
necrosis (rare)
3. Hyperpyrexia

4. Bleeding

5. Hyponatraemia

Probable Cause

Maximum with
(For example)

Minimum with
(For example)

Management

Toxic or
Hypersensitive
Interaction with
tricyclics or
meperidine
Decreased
platelet serotonin

Iproniazid

Tranylcypromine

Not known

Not known

SSRIs

Not known

SSRIs
SNRIs

Not known;
Probably MAOIs

Stop/change drug. Supportive
care; Death rate high.
Stop drug. Keep a gap of
1 week between imipramine
and MAOI. Supportive care.
Change drug. Do not coprescribe other drugs that
increase risk of bleeding;
Gastro-protective drugs such
as PPIs can decrease risk
to some extent in high-risk
patients
Risk higher in elderly; Avoid
co-prescribing other drugs
that cause hyponatraemia
(such as diuretics); monitor
closely

Probably SIADH

Recently, several atypical antipsychotics such as
olanzapine, quetiapine and aripiprazole have been
added to list of drugs used in maintenance treatment
of bipolar disorder. In addition, other antipsychotics
such as risperidone (and the others mentioned above)
are also used as antimanic agents.
Lamotrigine and Quetiapine (and its metabolite
norquetiapine) appear to have particular efficacy for
treatment of bipolar depression. There is a risk of skin
rash with lamotrigine particularly early in treatment
and the risk appears higher with faster escalation of
dose as well as with co-prescription of valproate. It is
therefore important to increase the dose of lamotrigine
very gradually as suggested in the summary of product
characteristics (SPC) and the dose prescribed depends
on other co-prescribed drugs (such as carbamazepine
and valproate).

LITHIUM
Lithium (Li) is an element (Atomic number 3 and
Atomic weight 7) which is the smallest alkali ion.

The element was discovered in 1817 by Arfuedson.
Since then, it has been used for treatment of gout and
for salt replacement in cardiac disease, but its use was
restricted due to fatal toxicity.
It was rediscovered in 1949 by John Cade, for use
in treatment of mania but its potential went unrecognised as it was discovered in Australia. Mogen Schou
in 1957, had to rediscover it yet again before it became
popular as a treatment of mania.

Indications
Although lithium salts are used in treatment of a
myriad of psychiatric and non-psychiatric disorders,
the established indications are only the following
ones:
1. Treatment of acute mania
2. Prophylaxis of bipolar mood disorder.
In addition, the following may also constitute
possible clinical indications of lithium use:
3. Treatment of schizo-affective disorder
4. Prophylaxis of unipolar mood disorder
5. Treatment of cyclothymia




<<<PAGE 203>>>

Psychopharmacology

Contraindications of Lithium Use
1. Presence of clear evidence of cardiac, renal, thyroid or neurological dysfunction
2. Presence of blood dyscrasia
3. During pregnancy and lactation
4. Concomitant administration of thiazide diuretics,
tetracyclines or anaesthetics
ACE inhibitors (such as captopril), Angiotensin
II receptor antagonists (such as losartan), NSAIDs
(nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs) and COX-2
inhibitors (such as celecoxib) can increase the risk of
lithium toxicity in an unpredictable manner, especially
in elderly.

VALPROATE
Valproate and lithium have been widely used as
first line drugs for treatment of mania as well as for
prophylaxis of bipolar mood disorder.
Valproic acid was first synthesised by Burton
and used as an organic solvent. In 1963, Meunier
serendipitously discovered the antiepileptic properties of valproic acid, while Lambert reported in 1966
that valpromide (a valproic acid analogue) might be
effective as an antimanic. It was approved by the US
FDA as an antiepileptic drug for absence seizures in
1978 and for the treatment of acute mania (and for
migraine headache prophylaxis) in 1996.
Although its mechanism of action is not clearly
understood, it increases GABA though other nonGABAergic mechanisms have been proposed.
The term valproate is often used to denote all
commercial preparations, since the common entity
in blood is valproic acid. The following preparations
of valproate are available in India:
i. Valproate sodium
ii. Divalproex (Enteric-coated stable coordination
compound composed of sodium valproate and
valproic acid in a 1:1 molar relationship)
iii. Chrono preparations (Enteric-coated compound
composed of sodium valproate and valproic acid
in a 3:2 ratio).

191

It is rapidly and completely absorbed after oral
administration. The peak plasma levels are reached
at 1-4 hours after a single oral dose. The half-life of
valproate is 8-17 hours.
The usual dose of valproate is 1000-3000 mg/day
orally in divided doses. The therapeutic blood level is
50-125 mg/ml. Oral loading strategies (20-30 mg/kg/
day) are rapidly effective in the management of acute
mania.

Indications
In addition to its primary indication as an anticonvulsant, Valproate has several other indications in
various psychiatric and neuropsychiatric disorders.

Bipolar Disorders
Acute Mania (as a first-line agent for the treatment
of acute mania in oral and IV forms): Several factors
associated with a favourable antimanic response to
valproate (as well as carbamazepine) include:
a. Co-morbid substance abuse or other psychiatric
disorders
b. Later age at onset and/or shorter duration of illness
c. History of poor response to lithium
d. Dysphoric mania, mixed affective episodes, or
rapid cycling
e. Organic/complicated mania associated with seizure disorder, history of head trauma, or EEG
abnormalities
f. D-M-I (Depression-Mania-Well Interval) pattern
of illness, as opposed to the M-D-I pattern
There is some suggestion that patients nonresponsive to valproate may respond well to
carbamazepine.
Prophylaxis: Valproate is probably less effective in
maintenance treatment of bipolar disorder than in
treatment of acute mania. It has been used alone, as
well as along with lithium and other mood stabilisers
in the maintenance treatment.
The addition of valproate to lithium has been
recognised as a useful treatment for mania refractory
to lithium monotherapy.




<<<PAGE 204>>>

192

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

Rapid cycling bipolar disorder and mixed (or dysphoric) mania: The patients with rapid cycling, mixed
affective episodes, or dysphoric mania are often
resistant to lithium treatment and respond better to
valproate. Valproate is also effective in management
of ultra-rapid cycling mood disorders.
Bipolar depression: Valproate appears to be generally
more effective in the treatment of acute mania than in
bipolar depression.

The use of valproate in pregnancy and lactation
should be best avoided. The NICE guidelines for treatment of bipolar disorder recommend that valproate is
best avoided in women of childbearing potential (see
Further Reading List).
In overdose, the amount of drug, that is not protein
bound, is high. Therefore, dialysis is useful in the
management of an overdose with valproate.

Neurological Disorders

Certain drug may increase (such as aspirin, cimetidine,
ibuprofen, erythromycin, fluoxetine, fluvoxamine,
phenothiazines) or decrease (such as carbamazepine,
phenytoin, phenobarbital, ethosuximide, rifampicin,
mefloquine) the serum levels of valproate.
In addition, valproate increases serum levels of
other drugs (such as lamotrigine, tricyclic antidepressants, zidovudine, tolbutamide).

Migraine and Pain syndromes: Valproate has been
used for prophylaxis of migraine headaches, as well
as for aborting an acute attack (IV route). Valproate
has also been used in treatment of trigeminal neuralgia
and neuropathic pain.
Seizure disorders: Valproate is primarily indicated for
treatment of absence seizures (both simple and complex), complex partial seizures, myoclonic seizures,
and generalised tonic-clonic seizures, as monotherapy
as well as adjunct therapy.

Other Disorders
Valproate has also been used at times in several other
conditions, including behavioural agitation in dementia, severe behavioural symptoms in mental retardation, ADHD and conduct disorder, schizoaffective
disorder (bipolar type), alcohol withdrawal, tardive
dyskinesia, impulse control disorder, panic disorder
and borderline personality disorder.

Side Effects
Adverse effects are more common with valproate
concentrations above 100 mg/ml.
The common side effects are nausea, sedation, tremor, flushing, weight gain, thrombocytopenia, menstrual disturbances (in women) and hair
loss. There are some reports of polycystic ovaries
and hyperandrogenism in young women with
epilepsy.
The most serious, though relatively uncommon,
side effects include hepatic toxicity (especially in
young children), acute haemorrhagic pancreatitis, and
Steven-Johnson syndrome.

Drug Interactions

CARBAMAZEPINE
Like lithium and valproate, carbamazepine too has
been used as an antimanic and for prophylaxis of bipolar disorder. It is a tricyclic compound synthesised
in 1953 by Schindler. It has a structure similar to
TCAs. The onset of action can be faster as compared
to lithium, but slower compared to valproate.
The usual dose is 600-1600 mg/day orally, in
divided doses. The treatment is best monitored with
repeated blood levels. The therapeutic blood levels
are 4-12 μg/ml and the toxic blood levels are usually
reached at >15 μg/ml.

Indications
The indications for use of carbamazepine include:
1. Seizures
i. Complex partial seizures (CPS)
ii. Generalised tonic clonic seizures
iii. Alcohol withdrawal seizures (rum fits), if persistent (also used sometimes for treatment of
simple alcohol withdrawal syndrome)
2. Psychiatric disorders
i. Bipolar mood disorder (especially for rapid
cyclers; lithium-refractory patients; lithium-




<<<PAGE 267>>>

Index
disorder 58, 61, 76, 83, 84
dysmorphophobia 84
halitosis 84
parasitosis 84
Delusions 58, 60, 62, 71
Delusions of
control 56
grandeur 56, 70, 83
jealousy 83
nihilism 71
persecution 56, 61, 70, 83
reference 56
Demence precoce 54
Dementia 22, 23, 76
praecox 54, 61
Denial 65, 207
Dependence syndrome 34
Dependent personality disorder 118
Depersonalisation 13, 46, 109
derealisation syndrome 109
disorder 109
Depot antipsychotic 67
Depressed mood 71
Depression 61, 80, 95, 227
with psychotic features 77
Depressive
episode 30, 71
equivalent 81, 106
ideation/cognition 71
pseudodementia 23
stupor 71
Derealisation 13, 46, 109
Desmopressin 169
Deterrent agents 41
Detoxification 40, 41, 44
Developmental
milestones 154
reading disorder 162
Dexamphetamine 167
Dhat syndrome 110
Diagnostic formulation 17
Diazepam 40, 67, 87, 94, 112, 137, 149,
218, 228
Digit
backwards 14
span test 14
Dipsomania 34, 36
Disaster management 112
Disintegrative psychosis 165
Disorders of
adult personality and behaviour 113
affect 56
excessive somnolence 137

perception 56
sexual preference 124
Disorganised
behaviour 62
schizophrenia 58
symptoms 62
Dissocial personality disorder 115
Dissociative
amnesia 100, 101
anaesthesia and sensory loss 100
and conversion disorders 99
convulsions 100, 101
disorder 100
fugue 101
identity disorder 102
motor disorders 99
Distortion 207
District mental health programme 237
Disulfiram 41, 42
ethanol reaction 41
Divalproex 191
Donepezil 25, 26
Dopamine 75
agonists 132
Double depression 81
Down’s syndrome 158
Dream anxiety disorder 140
Drug 33, 228
and alcohol dependence 227
induced psychoses 61
Dual-role transvestism 122
Duration of
therapy 202
untreated psychosis 63
Dyslalia 163
Dyssomnias 136
Dysthymia 73, 82
Dysthymic disorder 80, 82

E
Eating disorders 142
Echolalia 56, 59, 168, 225
Echopraxia 59, 225
Ecstasy 70
Educational history 9
Ego 206
defense mechanisms 206, 207
ideal 206
Egodystonic sexual orientation 123
Ego-structure 214
Ekbom syndrome 136, 137
Elation 70
Elective mutism 171

255
Electra complex 211
Electroconvulsive therapy 29, 67, 77,
98, 199, 228
Electroshock therapy 199
Elementary auditory hallucinations 56
Elevated mood 70
Emergency psychiatry 221
Emil Kraepelin 54
Emotional
blunting 56
lability 22, 25
over-involvement 64
shallowness 56
Emotionally unstable personality disorder 116
Emotions 69
Encopresis 170
English Lunacy Act of 1890 231
Enuresis 169
Environmental manipulation 26
Epidemiology 55, 222
Epilepsy 28
Epileptic seizures 101
Epiloia 159
Erectile dysfunction 127
Erotomania 84
Erotomanic delusions 83
Erythrophobia 93
Eugen Bleuler 54, 55
Euphoria 70
Exaltation 70
Excessive sexual drive 127
Excited
behaviour 227
catatonia 59
Expressed emotions 64, 65, 68
Expressive language disorder 163

F
Factitious disorder 119
Family
and marital therapy 80
history 7
structure 7
theories 64
therapy 68, 144, 217
tree 7
Fantasy life 10
Fatigability 72
Female
anorgasmia 130
orgasmic disorder 130
sexual arousal disorder 128




<<<PAGE 273>>>

Index
Unilateral ECT 202
Unipolar depression 69, 75
Urophilia 126

V
Vagal nerve stimulation 199
Valproate 30, 79, 191
Valproic acid 191
Valpromide 191
Van Gogh syndrome 60
Varenicline 52
Vascular surgery 132
Verbigeration 56, 59
Verdenafil 132
Violence 227
Vipasna 219
Visual hallucinations 29, 38, 56
Vocal tics 168
Voices
commenting 55, 56
heard arguing 55, 56

Volatile solvent use disorder 51
Voluntary admission 232
Von Domarus law 55
Vorbeireden 102
Voyeurism 125

W
Waxy flexibility 59
Wernicke’s encephalopathy 27, 38
Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome 27, 38
Wihtigo 110, 111
Windigo 111
Withdrawal
state 33, 34
symptoms 40
syndrome 37, 46
Word approximations 56
Work-shift 140
World (Mental) Health Report 2001
238, 239

261
Worthlessness 71

X
Xenophobia 93

Y
Y-BOCS 96
Yog nindra 219
Yoga 92, 107
Yohimbine 132

Z
Zalpelon 137, 197
Ziprasidone 66, 169
Zolpidem 137, 197
Zoophilia 126
Zoophobia 93
Zopiclone 137, 197
Zotepine 66
Zuclopenthixol 66

