<<<PAGE 41>>>

Organic (Including Symptomatic) Mental Disorders

ORGANIC CATATONIC DISORDER
According to the ICD-10, the following features
are required for the diagnosis of organic catatonic
disorder, in addition to the general guidelines for the
diagnosis of other organic mental disorders, described
earlier:
1. Stupor (diminution or complete absence of spontaneous movement with partial or complete mutism,
negativism, and rigid posturing);
2. Excitement (gross hypermotility with or without
a tendency to assaultiveness);
3. Mixed (shifting rapidly and unpredictably from
hypo- to hyperactivity).
The presence of other catatonic symptoms and
signs increases the confidence in the diagnosis. The
catatonic symptoms and signs are described in detail
in Chapter 5.

29

earlier. It is important to rule out any major disturbance
of consciousness, orientation, memory, or mood.
The delusions are variable and the type depends on
the underlying aetiology. The most common delusions
are persecutory in nature. Hallucinations (visual more
often than auditory) may accompany the delusions.
Schneiderian first rank symptoms (SFRS) are usually
not seen the organic delusional disorder (in contrast
to schizophrenia).

Diagnosis
Organic delusional disorder secondary to amphetamine use may be difficult to differentiate from paranoid schizophrenia. The differentiating points are an
acute onset, history of amphetamine use prior to the
onset, predominant visual hallucinations which may
be fleeting, absence of formal thought disorder and a
more ‘appropriate’ affect.

Aetiology

Aetiology

The aetiology and management of organic catatonic
disorder is described in detail in Chapter 19.

1. Drugs: Amphetamines, hallucinogens, cannabis,
disulfiram
2. Complex partial seizures (e.g. temporal lobe
epilepsy)
3. Huntington’s chorea (initial stages), Parkinson’s
disease, Wilson’s disease, and idiopathic basal
ganglia calcification
4. Right parietal lobe lesions, especially vascular
lesions
5. Lesions involving limbic system (e.g. tumours)
6. Spinocerebellar degeneration
7. Cerebral malaria
8. Herpes simplex encephalitis
9. Nutritional deficiencies (Vitamin B12, iron)
10. Demyelinating disorders (such as multiple sclerosis, metachromatic leukodystrophy)

Management
1. Treatment of the underlying cause, if amenable to
treatment.
2. Symptomatic treatment with low dose of a shortacting benzodiazepine (e.g. Lorazepam), or electroconvulsive therapy (if needed). Antipsychotics
should usually be avoided as they can make
catatonic features worse; however small doses
of atypical antipsychotics such as Risperidone,
Olanzapine, Aripiprazole or Quetiapine can be
used with care.

ORGANIC DELUSIONAL
(SCHIZOPHRENIA-LIKE) DISORDER
According to ICD-10, presence of predominant
delusions caused by an underlying organic cause is
required for the diagnosis of organic delusional disorder, in addition to the general guidelines for the
diagnosis of other organic mental disorders, described

Management
1. Treatment of the underlying cause such as removal
of toxic agent in amphetamine psychosis.
2. Symptomatic management with a low dose of an
antipsychotic medication (such as Risperidone, Haloperidol, Olanzapine, or Quetiapine) may be needed.




<<<PAGE 42>>>

30

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

ORGANIC MOOD (AFFECTIVE)
DISORDER
According to ICD-10, presence of prominent and
persistent mood disturbance caused by an underlying
organic cause is required for the diagnosis of organic
mood disorder, in addition to the general guidelines
for the diagnosis of other organic mental disorders,
described earlier. It is important to rule out any major
disturbance of consciousness, orientation, or memory.
The mood disturbance can be a major depressive
episode, a manic episode, or a mixed affective episode.
The severity may vary from mild to severe.

Aetiology
Some of the causes of organic mood disorder are
listed below:
1. Drugs:
Mania: INH, Levodopa, Bromide, LSD, Corticosteroids (hypomania), Hallucinogens, Tricyclic
antidepressants, Cocaine, Baclofen, Amphetamines, Bromocriptine, Cimetidine, Procyclidine
Depression: Reserpine, Ethanol, Clonidine,
Methyldopa, Propranolol, Corticosteroids, Antipsychotics (particularly typical antipsychotics),
Cimetidine, Anticancer chemotherapy, Oral contraceptives.
Any drug a depressed person is taking should be
considered a potential factor in the causation of
depressive episode.
2. Endocrine disorders:
Mania: Hyperthyroidism
Depression: Hypothyroidism, Cushing’s syndrome, Addison’s disease, hyper- and hypoparathyroidism.
3. CNS disorders: Parkinsonism, Huntington’s
chorea, PSP (progressive supranuclear palsy;
depression more likely), CVAs (cerebrovascular
accidents; left-sided anterior lesions and rightsided posterior lesions cause depression in stroke),
cerebral tumours, epilepsy (com plex partial
seizures), neurosyphilis (GPI), head injury (mania
more likely), multiple sclerosis.

4. Post-viral illnesses: Influenza, infectious mononucleosis, viral pneumonia, infectious hepatitis.
5. Deficiencies: Pellagra, deficiency of thiamine,
folate, niacin, folate, B12.
6. Others: Carcinoma pancreas (depression), SLE,
pernicious anaemia, temporal arteritis (depression), carcinoid syndrome (mania).

Management
1. Management of the underlying organic cause, if
treatable.
2. Symptomatic management, if the episodes are
severe. For example, for a manic episode, low dose
antipsychotic medication (such as risperidone,
haloperidol, olanzapine) and/or a mood stabiliser
(such as valproate); and for a depressive episode,
low dose antidepressants (such as sertraline or mirtazapine). Antipsychotics are not recommended
in patients who have suffered from stroke and/or
dementia as the risk of mortality is higher.
Pathological laughter and crying (associated
with multiple sclerosis or stroke) can similarly
respond to small dose SSRIs or small dose amitriptyline.

ORGANIC ANXIETY DISORDER
According to ICD-10, presence of prominent and
persistent generalised anxiety or panic caused by an
underlying cause is required for diagnosis of organic
anxiety disorder, in addition to the general guidelines
for the diagnosis of other organic mental disorders,
described earlier. It is important to rule out any major
disturbance of consciousness, orientation, memory,
personality, thought, perception, or mood.

Aetiology
1. Drugs and toxins: Cocaine, caffeine, amphetamines and other sympathomimetics, alcohol and
drug withdrawal, heavy metals, penicillin.
2. Endocrine disorders: Thyroid, pituitary, parathyroid, or adrenal dysfunction; pheochromocytoma;
fasting hypoglycaemia, carcinoid syndrome.




<<<PAGE 64>>>

52

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

apathy, impaired judgement, and neurological signs
(such as decreased reflexes, ataxia, nystagmus, incoordination and coma). Death can occur due to respiratory
depression, cardiac arrhythmias, or asphyxia.
The complications include irreversible damage to
liver and kidneys, peripheral neuropathy, perceptual
disturbances and brain damage.
There appears to be no specific treatment of the
inhalant use disorder. There is often an associated psychiatric disorder (usually schizophrenia or personality
disorder, particularly in solitary sniffers), or there is
a history of criminal background. The prognosis is
usually guarded.

PHENCYCLIDINE USE DISORDER
Phencyclidine (PCP) was introduced as a dissociative
anaesthetic agent (similar to ketamine) in 1950s.
However, its use was soon restricted to veterinary
anaesthesia as some human subjects developed
delirium while emerging from anaesthesia. Classified
as an atypical hallucinogen (street names: Peace pill;
angel dust), PCP selectively antagonises the neuronal
action of NMDA (N-methyl-D-aspartate).
PCP is usually taken either occasionally or in
binges (called as runs); however, some individuals do
take PCP in a regular manner. It can be administered
orally, intravenously or by snorting.

Intoxication and Complications
Acute PCP intoxication produces euphoria in small
doses; higher doses produce dysphoria. Other features
may include impulsiveness, agitation, impaired social
judgement, assaultativeness, feeling of numbness
and inability to move. PCP intoxication can sometimes present with psychiatric syndromes (catatonic
syndrome, delirium, stupor, paranoid hallucinatory
psychosis, mania or depression) and/or neurological
symptoms (nystagmus, ataxia, dysarthria, rigidity,
seizures or coma).

Withdrawal Syndrome
Although no clear-cut withdrawal syndrome has
been described, craving, social withdrawal, anxiety,

depression and impairment in cognitive functions
have been reported.

Treatment
The treatment of PCP intoxication is symptomatic and
usually involves gastric lavage, isolation, and use of
anticonvulsants (for seizures) and antipsychotics (for
PCP induced psychosis).
There is no specific treatment for phencyclidine
withdrawal syndrome.

OTHER USE DISORDERS
Caffeine and nicotine are among the most widely used
substances, as they are both legally available. Both of
these can cause intoxication, dependence, tolerance,
and withdrawal syndrome.
Nicotine use (often in the form of smoking) is more
common in schizophrenia and depression. Smoking
predisposes to increased risk of cardiovascular disease, respiratory disease and cancer, and can affect
metabolism of several psychotropic drugs. Smoking
also decreases serum levels of clozapine (and other
drugs such as olanzapine, duloxetine, fluphenazine)
by up to 50%. Clozapine levels can therefore rise
significantly after smoking cessation even whilst the
patient is on nicotine replacement therapy. This is due
to induction of liver enzymes CYP1A2 (cytochrome
P450 1A2) by hydrocarbons in tobacco smoke rather
than nicotine.
Nicotine withdrawal can occur 12-14 hours after
last smoke and can present with anxiety, restlessness, poor concentration, decreased sleep, increased
appetite and exacerbation of psychiatric symptoms in
those with pre-existing psychiatric disorder(s).
Nicotine replacement therapy is widely used
despite equivocal evidence, delivered in a variety
of preparations such as a sublingual tablet (2 mg),
lozenge (1, 2 or 4 mg), chewing gum (2 or 4 mg),
nasal spray (0.5 mg), inhalator (10 mg), and patches
(7, 14 or 21 mg).
In addition, bupropion (also called as amfebutamone; a norepinephrine and dopamine reuptake
inhibitor – NDRI antidepressant) and varenicline




<<<PAGE 78>>>

66

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry
Table 5.7: Antipsychotic Dose in Schizophrenia

Drug

Oral Dose Range
(mg/day)

Parenteral Dose
(mg/day)

Equivalent Oral Dose*
(Equal to 100 mg CPZ)

A. Typical/Traditional/First Generation Antipsychotics
1. Chlorpromazine (CPZ)
300-1000
50-100 IM
100
2. Flupentixol
3-18
—
2
3. Haloperidol
5-30
5-10 IM
2-3
4. Loxapine
25-250
—
10
5. Pimozide
4-12
—
2
6. Prochlorperazine
45-150
40-80 IM
15
7. Sulpiride
400-2400
—
200
8. Thioridazine
300-600
—
100
9. Trifluoperazine
15-50
1-5 IM
5
10. Triflupromazine
100-400
30-60 IM
25
11. Zuclopenthixol
25-150
50-100 IM
25
B. Atypical/Second Generation Antipsychotics
12. Amisulpride
400-1200
—
—
13. Aripiprazole
5-30
5.25-15 IM
—
14. Clozapine
50-900
—
50
15. Olanzapine
5-20
2.5-10 IM
2-3
16. Paliperidone
3-12
—
—
17. Quetiapine
150-800
—
50-100
18. Risperidone
2-16
—
0.5-1.0
19. Ziprasidone
40-160
—
20
20. Zotepine
75-300
—
—
*Equivalent doses are at best approximations only. The dose in a particular patient should be chosen on an individualised basis by the treating professional.

aripiprazole, and ziprasidone, are more commonly
used than the older typical (or first generation) antipsychotics such as trifluoperazine and haloperidol, in
acute stages. Atypical antipsychotics are also more
useful when negative symptoms are prominent, e.g.
in chronic schizophrenia.
Clozapine, another atypical antipsychotic, is
available in the Indian market. The clinical trials have
shown that clozapine is effective in about 30% of
patients who had no beneficial response to traditional
(typical and atypical) antipsychotics. It is an effective
drug; however, as it can cause agranulocytosis and
seizures as side-effects, it should be used with caution,
with regular WBC and neutrophil counts as advised
by the Summary of Product Characteristics (SPC).

Drug treatment is usually administered in the
outpatient setting as:
1. There are very few number of psychiatric beds in
India,
2. Majorities of families are willing to care for the
patients at home, and
3. Majority of patients do not require hospitalisation.
However, hospitalisation is indicated if there is:
1. Neglect of food and water intake,
2. Danger to self or others,
3. Poor treatment adherence,
4. Significant neglect of self-care, or
5. Lack of social support with evidence of abovementioned risks.




<<<PAGE 90>>>

78

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

ii. Severe depression with stupor, severe psychomotor retardation, or somatic syndrome.
iii. Severe treatment refractory depression.
iv. Delusional depression (psychotic features).
v. Presence of significant antidepressant sideeffects or intolerance to drugs.
Severe depression with suicidal risk is the first and
foremost indication for use of ECT. The prompt use
of ECT can be life-saving in such a situation.
The response is usually rapid, resulting in a marked
improvement. In most clinical situations, usually 6-8
ECTs are needed, given three times a week. When six
ECTs are administered, the usual pattern is three ECTs
in the first week, two in the second week and one in
the third week.
However, improvement is not sustained after
stopping the ECTs. Therefore, antidepressants are
often needed along with ECTs, in order to maintain
the improvement achieved. The safety of the ECT
procedure has now been well-established.
ECT can also be used for acute manic excitement,
if it is not adequately responding to antipsychotics and
mood stabilisers.

Lithium (Li)
Lithium has traditionally been the drug of choice for
the treatment of manic episode (acute phase) as well
as for prevention of further episodes in bipolar mood
disorder. It has also been used in treatment of depression with less success. (Lithium is discussed in detail
in Chapter 15).
There is usually a 1-2 week lag period before any
appreciable response is observed. So, for treatment
of acute manic episode, antipsychotics are usually
administered along with lithium, in order to provide
cover for the first few weeks.
The usual therapeutic dose range is 900-1500 mg
of lithium carbonate per day. Lithium treatment needs
to be closely monitored by repeated blood levels, as
the difference between the therapeutic and lethal blood
levels is not very wide (narrow therapeutic index).
Therapeutic blood lithium = 0.8-1.2 mEq/L
Prophylactic blood lithium = 0.6-1.2 mEq/L

A blood lithium level of >2.0 mEq/L is often
associated with toxicity, while a level of more than
2.5-3.0 mEq/L may be lethal.
Although lithium is indicated for therapeutic use
in all manic episodes, the preventive use is best in
usually those patients with bipolar disorder, in whom
the frequency of episodes is 1-3 per year or 2-5 per
two years.
The common acute toxic symptoms of lithium are
neurological while the common chronic side-effects
are nephrological and endocrinal (usually hypothyroidism).
The important investigations before star ting
lithium therapy include a complete general physical
examination, full blood counts, ECG, urine routine
examination (with/without 24 hour urine volume),
renal function tests and thyroid function tests.

Antipsychotics
Antipsychotics are an important adjunct in the
treatment of mood disorder. The commonly used
drugs include risperidone, olanzapine, quetiapine,
haloperidol, and aripiprazole. It is customary to use
the atypical antipsychotics first, before considering
the older typical antipsychotics.
Some of the indications include:
1. Acute manic episode
• Along with mood stabilisers for the first few
weeks, before the effect of mood stabilisers
becomes apparent.
• Where mood stabilisers are not effective, not indicated, or have significant side-effects.
• Given parenterally (IM or IV) for emergency
treatment of mania.
• Recently, there has been some early evidence that
atypical antipsychotics (e.g. olanzapine) might
have some mood stabilising properties.
2. Delusional depression
As stated above, antipsychotics are important adjuncts
in the treatment of delusional depression. Once again,
it is customary to use atypical antipsychotics such as
olanzapine, quetiapine, risperidone, and ziprasidone
first, although any antipsychotic can be used.




<<<PAGE 91>>>

Mood Disorders

iii. Bipolar depression
There is recent evidence that quetiapine has antidepressant efficacy in bipolar depression.
iv. Maintenance or prophylactic treatment in bipolar
disorder
Recent evidence shows that several atypical antipsychotics such as olanzapine, quetiapine and aripiprazole
can be successfully used in the maintenance treatment
of bipolar disorder.

Other Mood Stabilisers
The other mood stabilisers which are used in the treatment of bipolar mood disorders include:
1. Sodium valproate
• For acute treatment of mania and prevention of
bipolar mood disorder.
• Particularly useful in those patients who are refractory to lithium.
• The dose range is usually 1000-3000 mg/day (the
therapeutic blood levels are 50-125 mg/ml).
• It has a faster onset of action than lithium, therefore, it can be used in acute treatment of mania
effectively.
2. Carbamazepine and Oxcarbazepine
• For acute treatment of mania and prevention of
bipolar mood disorder.
• Particularly useful in those patients who are refractory to lithium and valproate.
• Particularly effective when EEG is abnormal
(although this is not necessary for the use of carbamazepine).
• The dose range of carbamazepine is 600-1600 mg/
day (the therapeutic blood levels are 4-12 mg/ml).
• The use of carbamazepine in treatment of bipolar
disorder has recently declined, partly due to its
potential for drug interactions.
• Oxcarbazepine has a narrow evidence base and its
use in bipolar disorder is quite recent.
3. Benzodiazepines
Lorazepam (IV and orally) and clonazepam are used
for the treatment of manic episode alone rarely; however, they have been used more often as adjuvants to
antipsychotics.

79

4. Lamotrigine is particularly effective for bipolar
depression and is recommended by several guidelines.
5. T3 and T4 as adjuncts for the treatment of rapid cycling mood disorder and resistant depression.

Other Treatments
Psychosurgery is an extremely rarely used method
of treatment and is resorted to only in exceptional
circumstances.
In depressive episode, which is either chronic or
persistently recurrent with a limited or absent response
to other modes of treatment, one of the following
procedures may very rarely be performed:
i. Stereotactic subcaudate tractotomy, or
ii. Stereotactic limbic leucotomy.
In carefully selected patients, the results are
reported to be satisfactory. However, in the current
day and age, psychosurgery is hardly ever considered
in routine clinical practice.

Psychosocial Treatment
Although somatic treatment appears to be the primary
mode of management in major mood disorders, psychosocial treatment is often helpful. These indications
include:
i. As an adjunct to somatic treatment.
ii. In mild to moderate cases of depression.
iii. Certain selected cases.
These methods include (see Chapter 18 for details):

Cognitive Behaviour Therapy
Cognitive behaviour therapy (CBT) aims at correcting depressive negative cognitions (ideations) such
as hopelessness, worthlessness, helplessness and pessimistic ideas, and replacing them by new cognitive
and behavioural responses.
CBT is useful in mild to moderate, non-bipolar
depression and can be used with or without somatic
treatment.

Interpersonal Therapy
Interpersonal therapy (IPT) attempts to recognise
and explore interpersonal stressors, role disputes and




<<<PAGE 110>>>

98

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

Treatment
Psychotherapy
1. Psychoanalytic psychotherapy is used in certain
selected patients, who are psychologically oriented.
2. Supportive psychotherapy is an important adjunct to other modes of treatment. Supportive
psychotherapy is also needed by the family
members.

Behaviour Therapy and Cognitive
Behaviour Therapy
Behaviour modification is an effective mode of
therapy, with a success rate as high as 80%, especially
for the compulsive acts. It is customary these days to
combine CBT with BT at most centres.
The techniques used are listed below (They are
described in Chapter 18):
i. Thought-stopping (and its modifications).
ii. Response prevention.
iii. Systematic desensitisation.
iv. Modelling.

Drug Treatment
1. Benzodiazepines (e.g. alprazolam, clonazepam)
have a limited role in controlling anxiety as
adjuncts and should be used very sparingly.
2. Antidepressants: Some patients may improve
dramatically with specific serotonin reuptake
inhibitors (SSRIs).
Clomipramine (75-300 mg/day), a nonspecific
serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SRI), was the first
drug used effectively in the treatment of OCD.
The response is better in the presence of depressive symptoms, but many patients with pure
OCD also improve substantially.
Fluoxetine (20-80 mg/day) is a good alternative to clomipramine and often preferred these
days for its better side-effect profile. Fluvoxamine (50-200 mg/day) is marketed as a specific
anti-obsessional SSRI drug, whilst paroxetine

(20-40 mg/day) and sertraline (50-200 mg/day)
are also effective in some patients.
3. Antipsychotics: These are occasionally used in
low doses (e.g. haloperidol, risperidone, olanzapine, aripiprazole, pimozide) in the treatment
of severe, disabling anxiety.
4. Buspirone has also been used beneficially as
an adjunct for augmentation of SSRIs, in some
patients.

Electroconvulsive Therapy
In presence of severe depression with OCD, ECT may
be needed. ECT is particularly indicated when there is
a risk of suicide and/or when there is a poor response
to the other modes of treatment. However, ECT is not
the treatment of first choice in OCD.

Psychosurgery
Psychosurgery can be used in treatment of OCD that
has become intractable, and is not responding to other
methods of treatment. It is worth mentioning that
psychosurgery is only available as a treatment choice
at a very few centres throughout the world.
The best responders are usually those who have
significant associated depression, although pure
obsessives also do respond. The main benefit is the
marked reduction in associated distress and severe
anxiety.
The procedures which can be employed are:
i. Stereotactic limbic leucotomy.
ii. Stereotactic subcaudate tractotomy.
Psychosurgery is usually followed by intensive
behaviour therapy aimed at rehabilitation. However,
with the easy availability of SSRIs, and a good response of OCD symptoms to SSRIs and other pharmacological measures, psychosurgery is very rarely
used in the treatment of OCD.
Very often, a comprehensive treatment of OCD
requires that multiple treatment modalities (e.g. drug
treatment and BT/CBT) be combined in a specific
manner, suitable to the particular patient being treated
at the time.




<<<PAGE 187>>>

Psychopharmacology

Steady state plasma levels are usually reached in
5-10 days. Once the drug is withdrawn, it may remain
in body for many days to many months. The main metabolic pathway is through liver (hepatic microsomal
enzymes). Oxidation and conjugation are the most
important methods of metabolism for phenothiazines.
Many of the metabolites, such as mesoridazine (for
thioridazine), reduced haloperidol (for haloperidol)
and 9-hydroxy-risperidone (for risperidone), are also
active compounds. Chlorpromazine has more than 150
metabolites, some of which are active. The excretion
of the metabolites is through kidneys and liver (enterohepatic circulation).
Most of the antipsychotics tend to have a therapeutic window. If the blood level is below this ‘window’,
the drug is ineffective. If the blood level is higher than
the upper limit of the ‘window’, there is toxicity or
the drug is again ineffective.

Classification
A classification of currently available antipsychotic
drugs is presented in Table 15.2.

Mechanism of Action
The exact mechanism of action of antipsychotics is
unknown. However, one of the major mechanisms
appears to be antidopaminergic activity of these drugs.
Antipsychotic drugs block D2-receptors, which are
mainly present in mesolimbic-mesocortical system
(mesolimbic system is concerned with emotional reactions), nigro-striatal system and tubero-infundibular
system. The relative potencies of these drugs in competing for D2-receptors parallel quite closely their
clinical potencies.
It is currently believed that antipsychotic drugs
are effective in treating psychosis due to their action on the D2-receptors located in the mesolimbic
system whilst extrapyramidal side-effects (EPSE)
are caused by blockade of D2-receptors situated in
nigro-striatal system and hyperprolactinaemia is
caused by D2-blockade in tubero-infundibular system.
However, other neurotransmitters (such as 5-HT, acetylcholine) are clearly implicated (see below; atypical
antipsychotics). Sedation is caused by histaminergic

175

blockade which is usually highest for drugs such as
chlorpromazine and thioridazine.

Second Generation Antipsychotics
A search for an antipsychotic drug which acts only
on the mesolimbic system but has no effect on nigrostriatal or tubero-infundibular systems, has led to the
development of a heterogeneous group of drugs collectively known as atypical or newer antipsychotics.
These are also known as second generation antipsychotics (SGAs) or serotonin-dopamine antagonists
or (SDAs). These include risperidone, quetiapine,
olanzapine, amisulpride, paliperidone, zotepine,
ziprasidone and aripiprazole.
By definition these drugs are effective antipsychotics without theoretically producing undesirable
extrapyramidal side-effects (i.e. antipsychotics without neuroleptic effect), or causing elevation of serum
prolactin levels. These are characterised by a selective
limbic dopamine blockade, D4-receptor blockade, or
a combination of potent 5-HT2 and weak D2 antagonism. These drugs should theoretically be safer with
lesser incidence of serious side-effects such as tardive
dyskinesia and neuroleptic malignant syndrome.
Clozapine is one such drug but it can cause
agranulocytosis and seizures. Risperidone, olanzapine,
quetiapine, aripiprazole, amisulpride and ziprasidone
are currently being used widely as atypical antipsychotics, while paliperidone and zotepine are also
available in the international market.
Atypical antipsychotics, in addition to their effect
on positive symptoms, are believed to be effective
in treatment of negative symptoms (such as apathy,
decreased sociality, anhedonia) of chronic schizophrenia. Clozapine in particular is effective in management
of treatment-resistant schizophrenia. However, there
is need for close haematological monitoring for
neutropenia or agranulocytosis as suggested in SPC
of the drug.

Side Effects
The antipsychotics are safe drugs with a high therapeutic index and wide margin of safety in routine
clinical dosages. In spite of this safety, a wide range




<<<PAGE 191>>>

Psychopharmacology

179

Contd...
Category and
Side Effect
3. Acute Dystonia

Probable Cause
—do—

Maximum with
(For example)
—do—

4. Rabbit Syndrome —do—
—do—
(Peri-oral tremor)
Dopaminergic (D2) Not known
5. Tardive
Dyskinesia (late receptor
onset oro-facial
super-sensitivity
dyskinesia)
Not known
Probably
6. Neuroleptic
haloperidol
Malignant
Syndrome
(Fever, EPS,
High CPK,
catatonic
symptoms and
autonomic
dysfunction)
C. Other Central Nervous System Effects
1. Seizures
Decreased seizure
Clozapine
threshold
Chlorpromazine
(High doses)
2. Sedation
Histaminergic
—do—
blockade

3. Depression or
Decreased catecho- Not known
Pseudolamine levels in
depression
brain
D. Metabolic and Endocrine Side Effects
1. Weight gain
H1 blockade
Almost all
antipsychotics esp.
Clozapine and
Olanzapine
2. Diabetes
Not known
Clozapine
Olanzapine
3. Galactorrhoea
Increased Prolactin Haloperidol
Risperidone
with/without
released due to
amenorrhoea
dopaminergic blockade in hypothalamus

Minimum with
(For example)
—do—

—do—
Clozapine

Not known

Management
Antiparkinsonian
medication; Rule out
hypercalcaemia
Antiparkinsonian
medication
Treatment unsatisfactory,
though several drugs are
available. Prevention
best.
Bromocriptine, Dantrolene, Baclofen, General
supportive care. Add-on
lorazepam, Occasionally
ECT

Trifluoperazine

Decrease dose. Change
to a safer antipsychotic

Haloperidol
Aripiprazole

This side effect may be
beneficial. Otherwise
decrease dose. Change
drug. Give single dose
only at night
Decrease dose. Change
drug. Occasionally antidepressants or ECT.

SDAs
(e.g. Ziprasidone)

Aripiprazole
Haloperidol

Change drug. Dietary
control. Exercises.

Ziprasidone
Aripiprazole
Aripiprazole
Quetiapine

Change drug. Dietary
control.
None. Change drug.

Contd...




<<<PAGE 193>>>

Psychopharmacology
Table 15.4: Some Factors in Poor Drug Concordance
1. Drug Related Factors
i. Adverse effects (particularly their early appearance and persistence)
ii. Slow onset of desirable effects
iii. Complexity of regimen (e.g. several doses/day)
iv. Route of administration (IM/IV as opposed to
oral)
2. Patient Related Factors
i. Poor education regarding illness and medication
ii. Denial of illness/absent insight
iii. Perceived stigma of mental disorder, medication, or visible side effects (e.g. dystonia)
iv. Treatment access problems (e.g. poverty, cost
of medications, distance from hospital)
v. Low IQ and/or low educational level
vi. Poor social support
vii. Specific psychopathology, e.g. persecutory ideation, hopelessness
viii. Poor doctor-patient relationship.
Table 15.5: Some Antipsychotic Depot Preparations*
1. Flupentixol decanoate 20-300 mg IM every 2-4
weeks (40 mg IM every 2 weeks roughly equivalent to
25 mg of fluphenazine decanoate IM every 2 weeks)
2. Fluphenazine decanoate 12.5-100 mg IM every 2-4
weeks (25 mg IM every 2 weeks roughly equivalent
to 300 mg of oral Chlorpromazine per day)
3. Haloperidol decanoate 25-250 mg IM every 4 weeks
(100 mg IM every 4 weeks roughly equivalent to 5
mg/day of oral haloperidol)
4. Olanzapine pamoate 150-300 mg IM every 2 weeks
or 300-405 mg IM every 4 weeks (Note risk of postinjection syndrome; Also note dose escalation chart
in SPC)
5. Pipotiazine palmitate 25-100 mg IM every 4 weeks
6. Risperidone Consta 25-50 mg IM every 2 weeks
(Note delay in onset of action by 2-3 weeks and need
for refrigeration)
7. Zuclopenthixol decanoate 200-400 mg IM every 2-4
weeks (200 mg IM every 2 weeks roughly equivalent
to 25 mg/day of oral Zuclopenthixol)
* Check SPC (Summary of Product Characteristics) before
prescribing any medicines

181

Since discontinuation of antipsychotic medication
often leads to relapse, long-acting preparations of
antipsychotics are valuable in the treatment. They
may be given in a depot form, either intramuscularly
or administered orally. There are several different
preparations available in the international market but
the preparations summarised in Table 15.5 are used
most often.

Clinical Use
Some general principles regarding routine clinical use
of antipsychotics include:
1. Although atypical antipsychotics are usually
preferred, the choice of antipsychotic medication
should be individualised in a particular patient.
The recent evidence shows more differences in
adverse effect profiles but not in efficacy between
older and newer antipsychotics.
2. Whenever possible the lowest effective dose
should be used.
3. Routinely only one antipsychotic should be used
at one time. Rational polypharmacy should be
reserved only for judicious treatment after nonresponse to single antipsychotics.
4. High doses of antipsychotics should be avoided.
5. Whenever appropriate, psychosocial management
should be combined with antipsychotic treatment.
6. It is really important to monitor physical health
on a regular basis whilst the patient receives antipsychotic medication (see above).
7. Do not use rapid neuroleptisation (parenteral use
of a loading dose of antipsychotic medication), if
possible.

ANTIDEPRESSANT DRUGS
Antidepressants are those psychotropic drugs which
are used for treatment of depressive disorders. These
have also been called as mood-elevators and thymoleptics.
Isoniazid (INH) was found to have mood elevating
properties in some patients suffering from tuberculosis
in 1951. Iproniazid, a MAO inhibitor and a derivative
of INH, was later (1958) introduced for the treatment




<<<PAGE 200>>>

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

188
Contd...
Category and
Side Effect
2. Severe hepatic
necrosis (rare)
3. Hyperpyrexia

4. Bleeding

5. Hyponatraemia

Probable Cause

Maximum with
(For example)

Minimum with
(For example)

Management

Toxic or
Hypersensitive
Interaction with
tricyclics or
meperidine
Decreased
platelet serotonin

Iproniazid

Tranylcypromine

Not known

Not known

SSRIs

Not known

SSRIs
SNRIs

Not known;
Probably MAOIs

Stop/change drug. Supportive
care; Death rate high.
Stop drug. Keep a gap of
1 week between imipramine
and MAOI. Supportive care.
Change drug. Do not coprescribe other drugs that
increase risk of bleeding;
Gastro-protective drugs such
as PPIs can decrease risk
to some extent in high-risk
patients
Risk higher in elderly; Avoid
co-prescribing other drugs
that cause hyponatraemia
(such as diuretics); monitor
closely

Probably SIADH

Recently, several atypical antipsychotics such as
olanzapine, quetiapine and aripiprazole have been
added to list of drugs used in maintenance treatment
of bipolar disorder. In addition, other antipsychotics
such as risperidone (and the others mentioned above)
are also used as antimanic agents.
Lamotrigine and Quetiapine (and its metabolite
norquetiapine) appear to have particular efficacy for
treatment of bipolar depression. There is a risk of skin
rash with lamotrigine particularly early in treatment
and the risk appears higher with faster escalation of
dose as well as with co-prescription of valproate. It is
therefore important to increase the dose of lamotrigine
very gradually as suggested in the summary of product
characteristics (SPC) and the dose prescribed depends
on other co-prescribed drugs (such as carbamazepine
and valproate).

LITHIUM
Lithium (Li) is an element (Atomic number 3 and
Atomic weight 7) which is the smallest alkali ion.

The element was discovered in 1817 by Arfuedson.
Since then, it has been used for treatment of gout and
for salt replacement in cardiac disease, but its use was
restricted due to fatal toxicity.
It was rediscovered in 1949 by John Cade, for use
in treatment of mania but its potential went unrecognised as it was discovered in Australia. Mogen Schou
in 1957, had to rediscover it yet again before it became
popular as a treatment of mania.

Indications
Although lithium salts are used in treatment of a
myriad of psychiatric and non-psychiatric disorders,
the established indications are only the following
ones:
1. Treatment of acute mania
2. Prophylaxis of bipolar mood disorder.
In addition, the following may also constitute
possible clinical indications of lithium use:
3. Treatment of schizo-affective disorder
4. Prophylaxis of unipolar mood disorder
5. Treatment of cyclothymia




<<<PAGE 206>>>

194

A Short Textbook of Psychiatry

Cyclic Ethers
An example is paraldehyde. It is not used commonly
as it is not very effective and is also dependence
producing.
Others
Antipsychotics (such as thioridazine, flupentixol,
olanzapine, quetiapine) and antidepressants (such as
doxepine) have sometimes been used for the treatment
of severe, intractable anxiety. However, antipsychotics
are not the drugs of first choice and should be used
with extreme discretion (with balancing of risks and
benefits) when all other drugs have failed to benefit.
Antidepressants (such as SSRIs, SNRIs and Mirtazapine) have recently emerged as treatments of choice
in several anxiety disorders including generalised
anxiety disorder, obsessive compulsive disorder, panic
disorder and obsessive compulsive disorder. There is
some data to support that smaller starting doses are
better as anxiety symptoms may worsen initially in
treatment.
Beta (β) Blockers
An example is propranolol which is particularly effective in treatment of peripheral somatic manifestations
of anxiety. It is also helpful in treatment of anticipatory anxiety and situational anxiety. Propranolol can
be used either alone or along with benzodiazepines.
β-blockers are not treatments of first choice in the
treatment of psychic or psychological manifestations
of anxiety.
Propranolol is contraindicated in patients with
bronchial asthma and cardiac conditions. It should be
used with caution in patients of age 40 and above. The
usual dose is 40-240 mg/day, administered in divided
doses.

Benzodiazepines
Since the discovery of chlordiazepoxide in 1957 by
Sternbach, benzodiazepines have replaced other antianxiety drugs and hypnotics though SSRIs are now
gradually becoming drugs of first choice in management of anxiety disorders.
The benzodiazepines can be classified according
to their elimination half-lives (Table 15.9).

Indications
The indications for use of benzodiazepines include
the following:
1. Generalised anxiety disorder; adjustment disorder
with anxious mood (Short-term use)
2. Panic disorder, agoraphobia, and school phobia (particularly alprazolam and clonazepam;
short-term use, along with antidepressants)
3. Agitated depression (short-term use, along with
antidepressants, for first 1-2 weeks)
4. Short-term treatment of insomnia
5. Stage 4 NREM-sleep disorders such as enuresis,
somnambulism (diazepam reduces duration of
Stage 4 NREM-sleep)
6. Nightmares (diazepam also reduces the REMsleep duration).
7. Pre-medication in anaesthesia (intravenous
lorazepam, midazolam, or diazepam)
8. Anticonvulsant use (drugs of choice for status epilepticus, myoclonic seizures and certain infantile
spasms)
9. To produce skeletal muscle relaxation (e.g. in
tetanus, cerebral palsy)
10. Treatment of alcohol and other drug withdrawal
syndromes
11. For minor surgical, endoscopic or obstetric procedures
12. Acute mania (lorazepam, usually with lithium or
atypical antipsychotics).
13. Antipsychotic-induced akathisia
14. Emergency management of acute psycho ses
(IV lorazepam, along with parenteral antipsychotics).
15. Narcoanalysis or abreaction (IV diazepam)
Whenever administered, benzodiazepines should
not be ordinarily used for more than 2-4 weeks at a
time; otherwise risk of dependence is quite high and
tolerance occurs.
Mechanism of Action
The exact mechanism of action of benzodiazepines is
not clear. The discovery of the benzodiazepine receptors in 1977 shed some light on the mode of action
(Fig. 15.1).


