<<<PAGE 158>>>

Regarding the specifier “with or without accompanying intellectual impairment,”
understanding the (often uneven) intellectual profile of a child or adult with autism spectrum
disorder is necessary for interpreting diagnostic features. Separate estimates of verbal and
nonverbal skill are necessary (e.g., using untimed nonverbal tests to assess potential strengths in
individuals with limited language).
To use the specifier “with or without accompanying language impairment,” the current level
of verbal functioning should be assessed and described. Examples of the specific descriptions for
“with accompanying language impairment” might include no intelligible speech (nonverbal),
single words only, or phrase speech. Language level in individuals “without accompanying
language impairment” might be further described as speaks in full sentences or has fluent speech.
Since receptive language may lag behind expressive language development in autism spectrum
disorder, receptive and expressive language skills should be considered separately.
The specifier “associated with a known genetic or other medical condition or environmental
factor” can be applied when an individual has a known genetic condition (e.g., Rett syndrome,
fragile X syndrome, Down syndrome), a known medical condition (e.g., epilepsy), or a history of
environmental exposure in utero to a known teratogen or infection (e.g., fetal valproate
syndrome, fetal alcohol syndrome, fetal rubella). This specifier should not be viewed as
synonymous with causation of autism spectrum disorder. A condition may be listed as being
associated with autism spectrum disorder when it is thought to be potentially clinically relevant
or inform care and not because the clinician is asserting a cause. Examples include autism
spectrum disorder associated with a unique genomic copy number variant that could be clinically
relevant even if the specific abnormality may not have directly caused nor have previously been
linked to autism spectrum disorder, or Crohn’s disease, which could exacerbate behavioral
symptoms.
60
The specifier “associated with a neurodevelopmental, mental, or behavioral problem” can be
applied to indicate problems (e.g., irritability, sleep problems, self-injurious behavior, or
developmental regression) that contribute to the functional formulation or are a focus of
treatment. Additional neurodevelopmental, mental, or behavioral disorders should also be noted
as separate diagnoses (e.g., attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder; developmental coordination
disorder; disruptive behavior, impulse-control, and conduct disorders; anxiety, depressive, or
bipolar disorders; tics or Tourette’s disorder; feeding, elimination, or sleep disorders).
Catatonia can occur as a comorbid condition with autism spectrum disorder. In addition to
classic symptoms of posturing, negativism (opposition or no response to instructions or external
stimuli), mutism, and stupor, an increase or worsening of stereotypy and self-injurious behavior
may form part of the symptom complex of catatonia in the setting of autism spectrum disorder.

Diagnostic Features
The essential features of autism spectrum disorder are persistent impairment in reciprocal social
communication and social interaction (Criterion A), and restricted, repetitive patterns of
behavior, interests, or activities (Criterion B). These symptoms are present from early childhood
and limit or impair everyday functioning (Criteria C and D). The stage at which functional
impairment becomes obvious will vary according to characteristics of the individual and his or




<<<PAGE 164>>>

Environmental.

A variety of risk factors for neurodevelopmental disorders, such as advanced
parental age, extreme prematurity, or in utero exposures to certain drugs or teratogens like
valproic acid, may broadly contribute to risk of autism spectrum disorder.
Genetic and physiological. Heritability estimates for autism spectrum disorder have ranged from
37% to higher than 90%, based on twin concordance rates, and a more recent five-country cohort
estimated heritability at 80%. Currently, as many as 15% of cases of autism spectrum disorder
appear to be associated with a known genetic mutation, with different de novo copy number
variants or de novo mutations in specific genes associated with the disorder in different families.
However, even when a known genetic mutation is associated with autism spectrum disorder, it
does not appear to be fully penetrant (i.e., not all individuals with that same genetic abnormality
will develop autism spectrum disorder). Risk for the majority of cases appears to be polygenic,
with perhaps hundreds of genetic loci making relatively small contributions. Whether these
findings apply to all racial/ethnic populations equally is unclear, given the limited inclusion of
communities of color in genetic research.
65

Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Cultural differences exist in norms for social interaction, nonverbal communication, and
relationships, but individuals with autism spectrum disorder are markedly impaired against the
norms for their cultural context. Culture influences the perception of autistic behaviors, the
perceived salience of some behaviors over others, and the expectations for child behavior and
parenting practices. Considerable discrepancies are found in age at diagnosis of autism spectrum
disorder in children from diverse ethnoracial backgrounds; most studies find delayed diagnosis
among socially oppressed ethnic and racialized children. In addition to being diagnosed later,
African American children are more often misdiagnosed with adjustment or conduct disorder
than are White children.

Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Autism spectrum disorder is diagnosed three to four times more often in males than in females,
and on average, age at diagnosis is later in females. In clinic samples, females tend to be more
likely to show accompanying intellectual developmental disorder as well as epilepsy, suggesting
that girls without intellectual impairments or language delays may go unrecognized, perhaps
because of subtler manifestation of social and communication difficulties. In comparison with
males with autism spectrum disorder, females may have better reciprocal conversation, and be
more likely to share interests, to integrate verbal and nonverbal behavior, and to modify their
behavior by situation, despite having similar social understanding difficulties as males.
Attempting to hide or mask autistic behavior (e.g., by copying the dress, voice, and manner of
socially successful women) may also make diagnosis harder in some females. Repetitive
behaviors may be somewhat less evident in females than in males, on average, and special
interests may have a more social (e.g., a singer, an actor) or “normative” focus (e.g., horses),
while remaining unusual in their intensity. Relative to the general population, rates of gender
variance have been reported to be increased in autism spectrum disorder, with higher variance in
females compared with males.




<<<PAGE 1070>>>

to antipsychotic medications that block dopamine D2 receptors. MIP occurs at higher rates with
antipsychotics that have higher potency for the dopamine D2 receptor, such as haloperidol,
fluphenazine, and risperidone, but there are no
808
differences in the clinical features of parkinsonism between first- and second-generation
antipsychotics.
Other medications that can cause MIP include calcium channel antagonists (e.g., flunarizine,
cinnarizine), dopamine depleters (e.g., reserpine, tetrabenazine), antiepileptics (e.g., phenytoin,
valproate, levetiracetam), antidepressants (e.g., selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors,
monoamine oxidase inhibitors), lithium, chemotherapeutic drugs (e.g., cystosine arabinoside,
cyclophosphamide, vincristine, doxorubicin, paclitaxel, etoposide), and immunosuppressants
(e.g., cyclosporine, tacrolimus). Toxins (e.g., 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine
[MPTP], organophosphate pesticides, manganese, methanol, cyanide, carbon monoxide, and
carbon disulfide) may also cause MIP.
The time course for development of MIP varies. Usually, MIP develops a few weeks after
starting or raising the dose of a medication known to cause parkinsonism or after reducing an
antiparkinsonian medication (e.g., an anticholinergic agent) that is being used to treat or prevent
medication-induced dystonia or parkinsonian symptoms. However, MIP may also develop
rapidly after starting or raising the dose of a medication or have an insidious onset after many
months of exposure. With antipsychotic medications or other dopamine receptor blocking agents,
MIP typically develops 2–4 weeks after starting the medication and usually by 3 months. Mainly
with calcium channel blockers, a second peak of symptom onset is reported after about 1 year.
Reported rates of MIP are affected by absence of standard diagnostic criteria, incorrect
diagnosis or misattribution of MIP signs to Lewy body disease (e.g., Parkinson’s disease), or a
psychiatric condition, and overall lack of recognition, especially in milder cases. It is estimated
that at least 50% of outpatients receiving long-term antipsychotic treatment with typical agents
develop parkinsonian signs or symptoms at some point in their course of treatment.
There are no clinical characteristics that distinguish MIP reliably from Parkinson’s disease.
Because motor signs and symptoms in Parkinson’s disease begin unilaterally and progress
asymmetrically, the subacute onset of bilateral parkinsonism within weeks of starting an
antipsychotic or other MIP-causing agent is highly suggestive for MIP. Parkinsonian signs are
often symmetric in MIP, but asymmetric patterns are not uncommon and should not exclude a
diagnosis of MIP. In addition, the course and presentation of parkinsonism should not be better
accounted for by psychiatric phenomena, such as catatonia, negative symptoms of schizophrenia,
or psychomotor retardation in a major depressive episode; other nonparkinsonian medicationinduced movement disorders; another neurological or medical condition (e.g., Parkinson’s
disease, Wilson’s disease); or antipsychotic-exacerbated Parkinson’s disease.
In MIP, rigidity and bradykinesia are more often present, whereas tremor is somewhat less
common and may be absent. Parkinsonian tremor, also referred to as a “pill-rolling tremor,” is a
steady, rhythmic oscillatory movement (3–6 cycles per second) that is apparent at rest and is
typically slower than other tremors. It may be intermittent, unilateral or bilateral, or dependent on
limb position (i.e., positional tremor). The tremor may involve the limbs, head, jaw, mouth, lip
(“rabbit syndrome”), or tongue. As it is present at rest, the tremor can be suppressed, especially




<<<PAGE 1080>>>

These conditions include Huntington’s disease, Wilson’s disease, Sydenham’s (rheumatic)
chorea, systemic lupus erythematosus, thyrotoxicosis, heavy metal poisoning, ill-fitting dentures,
dyskinesia due to other medications such as L-dopa or bromocriptine, and spontaneous
dyskinesias. Factors that may be helpful in making the distinction are evidence that the
symptoms preceded the exposure to the antipsychotic medication or other dopamine receptor
blocking agent or that other focal neurological signs are present. It should be noted that other
movement disorders may coexist with tardive dyskinesia. Because spontaneous dyskinesia can
occur in more than 5% of individuals and is also more common in elderly persons, it may be
difficult to prove that antipsychotic medications produced tardive dyskinesia in a given
individual. Tardive dyskinesia must be distinguished from symptoms that are due to a
medication-induced acute movement disorder (e.g., medication-induced parkinsonism, acute
dystonia, acute akathisia). Acute dystonia and acute akathisia can develop quickly within hours
to days, and medication-induced parkinsonism develops within weeks of initiating or increasing
the dose of an antipsychotic medication or other dopamine receptor blocking agent (or reducing
the dose of a medication used to treat the acute extrapyramidal symptoms). Tardive dyskinesia,
on the other hand, generally develops after more prolonged exposure to antipsychotic medication
(months to years) and can appear after the withdrawal of antipsychotic medication; the minimum
exposure history required for the diagnosis of tardive dyskinesia is antipsychotic medication use
for at least 3 months (or 1 month in middle-age and elderly individuals).

Tardive Dystonia Tardive Akathisia
G24.09 Tardive Dystonia
G25.71 Tardive Akathisia
This category is for tardive syndromes involving other types of movement problems, such as
dystonia or akathisia, which are distinguished by their late emergence in the course of treatment
and their potential persistence for months to years, even in the face of discontinuation of an
antipsychotic medication or other dopamine receptor blocking agent or dosage reduction.
817

Medication-Induced Postural Tremor
G25.1 Medication-Induced Postural Tremor
The essential feature of this condition is a fine tremor occurring during attempts to maintain a
posture, which develops in association with the use of medication. Medications with which such
a tremor may be associated include lithium, β-adrenergic medications (e.g., isoproterenol),
stimulants (e.g., amphetamine), dopaminergic medications, anticonvulsant medications (e.g.,
valproic acid), antidepressant medications, and methylxanthines (e.g., caffeine, theophylline).
The tremor is a regular, rhythmic oscillation of the limbs (most commonly hands and fingers),
head, mouth, or tongue, most commonly with a frequency of between 8 and 12 cycles per
second. It is most easily observed when the affected body part is held in a sustained posture (e.g.,
hands outstretched, mouth held open). The tremor may worsen in severity when the affected




<<<PAGE 1335>>>

1023
of intermittent explosive disorder, 529
of major depressive disorder, 189
of neurocognitive disorders, 697
of nightmare disorder, 458
of OCD, 268
of obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea, 432
of opioid use disorder, 612
of schizotypal personality disorder, 746
of sleepwalking, 454
of specific learning disorder, 82–83
of stereotypic movement disorder, 91
Fan nao, 879
Fantasies, and female sexual interest/arousal disorder, 490
Fatigue
generalized anxiety disorder and, 251
hypersomnolence disorder and, 420
major depressive disorder and, 186
Fear
agoraphobia and, 247
definition of, 215
genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder and, 494
non–rapid eye movement sleep arousal disorders and, 453
specific phobia and, 225
Feeding and eating disorders, characteristics of, 371. See also Anorexia nervosa; Avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder;
Binge-eating disorder; Bulimia nervosa; Pica; Rumination disorder
Female orgasmic disorder, 485–489
Female sexual interest/arousal disorder, 489–493, 495
Fentanyl, 610, 612
Fetal alcohol spectrum disorder (FASD), 919
Fetal alcohol syndrome, 59, 917–918
Fetal rubella, 59
Fetal valproate syndrome, 59
Fetishistic disorder, 779, 796–798, 800
Fibromyalgia, 355, 498
Field Trials, and revision process for DSM-5, 7–8
Finland, prevalence of
delirium in, 676
delusional disorder in, 107
nightmare disorder in, 459
psychotic disorder due to another medical condition in, 132
pyromania in, 538
schizoaffective disorder in, 123
sexual sadism disorder in, 791, 792
tobacco-related disorders in, 649
Firearms, alcohol use and possession of, 560
First responders, and traumatic events, 306
Five Factor Model of personality (FFM), 893
Flashbacks
acute stress disorder and, 318
dissociative identity disorder and, 332
PTSD and, 306, 313, 318
substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder and, 130
Flight of ideas, and manic episodes, 144
Fluency. See Childhood-onset fluency disorder
Flynn effect, and intellectual developmental disorders, 38
Food avoidance emotional disorder, 377


