<<<PAGE 662>>>

excessive sleepiness/fatigue during waking hours or, less commonly, a long
sleep period.
Parasomnia type: Characterized by abnormal behavioral events during sleep.
Mixed type: Characterized by a substance/medication-induced sleep problem
characterized by multiple types of sleep symptoms, but no symptom clearly
predominates.
Specify (see Table 1 in the chapter “Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders,”
which indicates whether “with onset during intoxication” and/or “with onset during
withdrawal” applies to a given substance class; or specify “with onset after
medication use”):
With onset during intoxication: If criteria are met for intoxication with the
substance and the symptoms develop during the intoxication.
With onset during withdrawal: If criteria are met for withdrawal from the
substance and the symptoms develop during, or shortly after, withdrawal.
With onset after medication use: If symptoms developed at initiation of
medication, with a change in use of medication, or during withdrawal of
medication.

Recording Procedures
The name of the substance/medication-induced sleep disorder begins with the specific substance
(e.g., alcohol) that is presumed to be causing the sleep disturbance. The ICD-10-CM code that
corresponds to the applicable drug class is selected from the table included in the criteria set. For
substances that do not fit into any of the classes (e.g., fluoxetine), the ICD-10-CM code for the
other (or unknown) substance class should be used and the name
470
of the specific substance recorded (e.g., F19.982 fluoxetine-induced sleep disorder, insomnia
type). In cases in which a substance is judged to be an etiological factor but the specific
substance is unknown, the ICD-10-CM code for the other (or unknown) substance class is used
and the fact that the substance is unknown is recorded (e.g., F19.982 unknown substanceinduced sleep disorder, hypersomnia type).
To record the name of the disorder, the comorbid substance use disorder (if any) is listed
first, followed by “with substance/medication-induced sleep disorder” (incorporating the name of
the specific etiological substance/medication), followed by the specification of onset (i.e., with
onset during intoxication, with onset during withdrawal, with onset after medication use),
followed by the subtype designation (i.e., insomnia type, daytime sleepiness type, parasomnia
type, mixed type). For example, in the case of insomnia occurring during withdrawal in a man
with a severe lorazepam use disorder, the diagnosis is F13.282 severe lorazepam use disorder
with lorazepam-induced sleep disorder, with onset during withdrawal, insomnia type. A separate
diagnosis of the comorbid severe lorazepam use disorder is not given. If the substance-induced
sleep disorder occurs without a comorbid substance use disorder (e.g., with medication use as




<<<PAGE 707>>>

Specify current severity:
Mild: Occurs on 25%–50% of occasions of sexual activity.
Moderate: Occurs on 50%–75% of occasions of sexual activity.
Severe: Occurs on 75% or more of occasions of sexual activity.

Recording Procedures
The name of the substance/medication-induced sexual dysfunction begins with the specific
substance (e.g., alcohol) that is presumed to be causing the sexual dysfunction. The ICD-10-CM
code that corresponds to the applicable drug class is selected from the table included in the
criteria set. For substances that do not fit into any of the classes (e.g., fluoxetine), the ICD-10CM code for the other (or unknown) substance class should be used and the name of the specific
substance recorded (e.g., F19.981 fluoxetine-induced sexual dysfunction). In cases in which a
substance is judged to be an etiological factor but the specific substance is unknown, the ICD-10CM code for the other (or unknown) substance class is used and the fact that the substance is
unknown is recorded (e.g., F19.981 unknown substance-induced sexual dysfunction).
When recording the name of the disorder, the comorbid substance use disorder (if any) is
listed first, followed by the word “with,” followed by the name of the substance-induced sexual
dysfunction, followed by the specification of onset (i.e., onset during intoxication, onset during
withdrawal, with onset after medication use), followed by the severity specifier (e.g., mild,
moderate, severe). For example, in the case of erectile dysfunction occurring during intoxication
in a man with a severe alcohol use disorder, the diagnosis is F10.281 severe alcohol use disorder
with alcohol-induced sexual dysfunction, with onset during intoxication, moderate. A separate
diagnosis of the comorbid severe alcohol use disorder is not given. If the substance-induced
sexual dysfunction occurs without a comorbid substance use disorder (e.g., after a one-time
heavy use of the substance), no accompanying substance use disorder is noted (e.g., F15.981
amphetamine-induced sexual dysfunction, with onset during intoxication). When more than one
substance is judged to play a significant role in the development of the sexual dysfunction, each
should be listed separately (e.g., F14.181 mild cocaine use disorder with cocaine-induced sexual
dysfunction, with onset during intoxication, moderate; F19.981 fluoxetine-induced sexual
dysfunction, with onset after medication use, moderate).

Diagnostic Features
The essential features of substance/medication-induced sexual dysfunction are clinically
significant disturbances in sexual function that are predominant in the clinical picture (Criterion
A) that are judged to be due to the effects of a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse or medication).
The sexual dysfunction must have developed during or soon after substance intoxication or
withdrawal or after exposure to or withdrawal from a medication, and the substances or
medications must be capable of producing the symptoms (Criterion B2). Substance/medicationinduced sexual dysfunction due to a prescribed treatment for a
507
mental disorder or another medical condition must have its onset while the individual is




<<<PAGE 709>>>

substance/medication-induced sexual dysfunction typically concern the effects of antidepressant
drugs. The prevalence of antidepressant-induced sexual dysfunction varies in part depending on
the specific agent. Approximately 25%–80% of individuals taking monoamine oxidase
inhibitors, tricyclic antidepressants, serotonergic antidepressants, and combined serotonergicadrenergic antidepressants report sexual side effects. There
508
are differences in the incidence of sexual side effects between some serotonergic and combined
adrenergic-serotonergic antidepressants, with medications such as citalopram, fluoxetine,
fluvoxamine, paroxetine, sertraline, and venlafaxine having the highest rates of sexual
dysfunction.
Approximately 50% of individuals taking antipsychotic medications will experience adverse
sexual side effects, including problems with sexual desire, erection, lubrication, ejaculation, or
orgasm. The incidence of these side effects among different antipsychotic agents is unclear.
Exact prevalence and incidence of sexual dysfunctions among users of nonpsychiatric
medications such as cardiovascular, cytotoxic, gastrointestinal, and hormonal agents are
unknown. Elevated rates of sexual dysfunction have been reported high-dose opioid drugs for
pain. There are increased rates of decreased sexual desire, erectile dysfunction, and difficulty
reaching orgasm associated with illicit substance use. The prevalence of sexual problems appears
related to chronic drug abuse and appears higher in individuals who abuse heroin (approximately
60%–70%) than in individuals who abuse amphetamine-type substances or 3,4methylenedioxymethamphetamine (i.e., MDMA, ecstasy). Elevated rates of sexual dysfunction
are also seen in individuals receiving methadone but are seldom reported by individuals
receiving buprenorphine. Chronic alcohol abuse and chronic nicotine abuse are related to higher
rates of erectile problems.

Development and Course
The onset of antidepressant-induced sexual dysfunction may be as early as 8 days after the agent
is first taken. Approximately 30% of individuals with mild to moderate orgasm delay will
experience spontaneous remission of the dysfunction within 6 months. In some cases, serotonin
reuptake inhibitor–induced sexual dysfunction may persist after the agent is discontinued. The
time to onset of sexual dysfunction after initiation of antipsychotic drugs or drugs of abuse is
unknown. It is probable that the adverse effects of nicotine and alcohol may not appear until after
years of use. Premature (early) ejaculation can sometimes occur after cessation of opioid use.
There is some evidence that disturbances in sexual function related to substance/medication use
increase with age.

Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
There may be an interaction among cultural factors, the influence of medications on sexual
functioning, and the response of the individual to those changes.

Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Some gender differences in sexual side effects from substances and medications may exist, such




<<<PAGE 1082>>>

Antidepressant Discontinuation Syndrome
T43.205A Initial encounter
T43.205D Subsequent encounter
T43.205S Sequelae
Discontinuation symptoms may occur following treatment with all types of antidepressants. The
incidence of this syndrome depends on the dosage and half-life of the medication being taken, as
well as the rate at which the medication is tapered. Short half-life medications that are abruptly
discontinued (or when the dose is significantly reduced) rather than tapered gradually may pose
the greatest risk. The short-acting antidepressants paroxetine and venlafaxine are the agents most
commonly associated with discontinuation symptoms. Antidepressant discontinuation syndrome
may occur in the context of intermittent non-adherence to treatment and therefore may be
irregularly present in some individuals who have not actually stopped taking the medication.
This is especially true for very short half-life medications (e.g., venlafaxine). By contrast, long
half-life medications like fluoxetine seldom produce significant discontinuation effects.
Unlike withdrawal syndromes associated with opioids, alcohol, and other substances,
antidepressant discontinuation syndrome has no pathognomonic symptoms. Instead, the
symptoms tend to be vague and variable. Symptoms typically begin 2–4 days after the last dose
of the antidepressant. For selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, symptoms such as dizziness,
tinnitus, “electric shock”–like sensations, insomnia, and acute anxiety are described. The
antidepressant use before discontinuation must not have incurred hypomania or mixed state (i.e.,
there should be confidence that the discontinuation syndrome is not the result of fluctuations in
mood stability associated with the previous treatment). For the tricyclic antidepressants, sudden
discontinuation has been associated with gastrointestinal symptoms (cramping—reflecting
cholinergic overactivity after stopping an anticholinergic tricyclic antidepressant) as well as
rebound hypomania.
The antidepressant discontinuation syndrome is based solely on pharmacological factors and
is not related to the reinforcing effects of an antidepressant. Unlike the discontinuation of
substances with reinforcing effects like opioids, drug craving does not occur. Also, when a
stimulant is used to augment an antidepressant, abrupt cessation may result in stimulant
withdrawal symptoms (see “Stimulant Withdrawal” in the chapter “Substance-Related and
Addictive Disorders”) rather than the antidepressant discontinuation syndrome described here.
The prevalence of antidepressant discontinuation syndrome is unknown but is thought to vary
according to any of the following factors: the dosage before discontinuation, the half-life (i.e.,
occurring more commonly with short half-life medications) and receptor-binding affinity of the
medication (e.g., more likely to occur with serotonin reuptake inhibitors), and possibly the
individual’s genetically influenced rate of metabolism for this
819
medication. Therefore, discontinuation reactions occur more frequently with short half-life
medications, but may also be influenced by rapid or ultrarapid metabolizer status of cytochrome
enzymes that metabolize the antidepressant.


