<<<PAGE 708>>>

receiving the medication (or during withdrawal, if a withdrawal is associated with the
medication). Once the treatment is discontinued, the sexual dysfunction will usually improve or
remit within days to several weeks (depending on the half-life of the substance/medication and
the presence of withdrawal). The diagnosis of substance/medication-induced sexual dysfunction
should not be given if the onset of the sexual dysfunction precedes the substance/medication
intoxication or withdrawal, or if the symptoms persist for a substantial period of time (i.e.,
usually longer than 1 month) from the time of severe intoxication or withdrawal.

Associated Features
Sexual dysfunctions can occur in association with intoxication with the following classes of
substances: alcohol; opioids; sedatives, hypnotics, or anxiolytics; stimulants (including cocaine);
and other (or unknown) substances. Sexual dysfunctions can occur in association with
withdrawal from the following classes of substances: alcohol; opioids; sedatives, hypnotics, or
anxiolytics; and other (or unknown) substances. Medications that can induce sexual dysfunctions
include antidepressants, antipsychotics, and hormonal contraceptives.
The most commonly reported side effect of antidepressant drugs is difficulty with orgasm or
ejaculation in men, and with arousal in women. Problems with desire and erection are less
frequent. There is evidence that the effects of antidepressant medications on sexual dysfunction
occur regardless of levels of depression. Approximately 30% of sexual complaints are clinically
significant. Certain agents (i.e., bupropion, mirtazapine, nefazodone, and vilazodone) appear to
have lower rates of sexual side effects than other antidepressants.
The sexual problems associated with antipsychotic drugs, including problems with sexual
desire, erection, lubrication, ejaculation, or orgasm, have occurred with typical as well as
atypical agents. However, problems are less common with prolactin-sparing antipsychotics or
those that do not block dopamine receptors.
Although the effects of mood stabilizers on sexual function are unclear, it is possible that
lithium and anticonvulsants, with the possible exception of lamotrigine, have adverse effects on
sexual desire. Problems with orgasm may occur with gabapentin. Similarly, there may be a
higher prevalence of erectile and orgasm problems associated with benzodiazepines. There have
not been such reports with buspirone.
Many nonpsychiatric medications, such as cardiovascular, cytotoxic, gastrointestinal, and
hormonal agents, are associated with disturbances in sexual function. Use of 5-α-reductase
inhibitors (e.g., dutasteride, finasteride) may reduce erectile function, ejaculatory function, and
libido in men.
Illicit substance use is associated with decreased sexual desire, erectile dysfunction, and
difficulty reaching orgasm. Sexual dysfunctions are also seen in individuals receiving methadone
but are seldom reported by individuals receiving buprenorphine. Chronic nicotine or chronic
alcohol abuse are associated with erectile problems. Cannabis, like alcohol, is a central nervous
system depressant, and its use may be a risk factor for sexual dysfunction; however, it has also
been suggested to potentially improve satisfaction with orgasm.

Prevalence
The prevalence and the incidence of substance/medication-induced sexual dysfunction are
unclear, likely because of underreporting of treatment-emergent sexual side effects. Data on




<<<PAGE 849>>>

F13.21 Moderate, In sustained remission
F13.20 Severe: Presence of 6 or more symptoms.
F13.21 Severe, In early remission
F13.21 Severe, In sustained remission
622

Specifiers
“In a controlled environment” applies as a further specifier of remission if the individual is both
in remission and in a controlled environment (i.e., in early remission in a controlled environment
or in sustained remission in a controlled environment). Examples of these environments are
closely supervised and substance-free jails, therapeutic communities, and locked hospital units.

Diagnostic Features
Sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic substances include benzodiazepines, benzodiazepine-like drugs
(e.g., zolpidem, zaleplon), carbamates (e.g., glutethimide, meprobamate), barbiturates (e.g.,
secobarbital), and barbiturate-like hypnotics (e.g., glutethimide, methaqualone, propofol). This
class of substances includes most prescription sleeping medications and most prescription
antianxiety medications. Nonbenzodiazepine antianxiety agents (e.g., buspirone, gepirone) are
not included in this class because they do not appear to be associated with significant misuse.
Like alcohol, these agents are brain depressants and can produce similar
substance/medication-induced and substance use disorders. Sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic
substances are available both by prescription and illegally. Some individuals who obtain these
substances by prescription will develop a sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder, while
others who misuse these substances or use them for intoxication will not develop a use disorder.
In particular, sedatives, hypnotics, or anxiolytics with rapid onset or short to intermediate lengths
of action may be taken for intoxication purposes, although longer-acting substances in this class
may be taken for intoxication as well.
Craving (Criterion A4), either during periods of active use or during periods of abstinence, is
a typical feature of sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder. Misuse of substances from this
class may occur in conjunction with use of other substances. For example, individuals may use
intoxicating doses of sedatives or benzodiazepines to “come down” from cocaine or
amphetamines or use high doses of benzodiazepines in combination with methadone to “boost”
its effects.
Repeated absences or poor work performance, school absences, suspensions or expulsions,
and neglect of children or household (Criterion A5) may be related to sedative, hypnotic, or
anxiolytic use disorder; the continued use of the substances despite arguments with a spouse
about consequences of intoxication or despite physical fights (Criterion A6) may also occur.
Limiting contact with family or friends, avoiding work or school, or stopping participation in
hobbies, sports, or games (Criterion A7) and recurrent sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use when
driving an automobile or operating machinery when impaired by such use (Criterion A8) are also
seen in sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder.
Very significant levels of tolerance and withdrawal can develop to sedative, hypnotic, or


