<<<PAGE 632>>>

Although age at onset is variable, symptoms begin typically in adolescence and early adulthood
and persist for several months to years before diagnosis is established. Severity may decrease
with age. Relapse of symptoms is common.
Clinical expression may vary across the life span depending on social, school, and work
obligations. Exacerbation is usually triggered by a change in work or school schedule that
requires an early rise time. Individuals who can alter their work schedules to accommodate the
delayed circadian sleep and wake timing can experience remission of symptoms.
Increased prevalence in adolescence may be a consequence of both physiological and
behavioral factors. Hormonal changes may be involved specifically, as delayed sleep phase is
associated with the onset of puberty. Thus, delayed sleep phase type in adolescents should be
differentiated from the common delay in the timing of circadian rhythms in this age group. In the
familial form, the course is persistent and may not improve significantly with age.
445

Risk and Prognostic Factors
Genetic and physiological.

Predisposing factors may include a longer than average circadian
period, changes in light sensitivity, and impaired homeostatic sleep drive. Some individuals with
delayed sleep phase type may be hypersensitive to evening light, which can serve as a delay
signal to the circadian clock, or they may be hyposensitive to morning light such that its phaseadvancing effects are reduced. Genetic factors may play a role in the pathogenesis of familial and
sporadic forms of delayed sleep phase type. A study of unrelated families showing strong
heritability of the disorder described a mutation in the clock gene, CRY1, occurring in about
0.6% of the population, which results in increased inhibition of transcription of the activator
clock genes, CLOCK and BMAL1.

Diagnostic Markers
Confirmation of the diagnosis includes a complete history and use of a sleep diary or actigraph
(i.e., a wrist-worn motion detector that monitors motor activity for prolonged periods; if
measured for at least 7 days, motor activity can be used as a proxy for sleep-wake patterns). The
period covered should include weekends, when social and occupational obligations are less strict,
to ensure that the individual exhibits a consistently delayed sleep-wake pattern. The most
commonly available laboratory-derived phase marker is salivary dim light melatonin onset
(DLMO) time. However, not all individuals with diagnosed delayed sleep phase exhibit delayed
DLMO. An investigation of rigorously diagnosed individuals found that only 57% exhibited
physiological phase delays (as gauged by a DLMO time occurring subsequent to the desired
bedtime), whereas the remaining 43% had DLMO times that occurred before the desired
bedtimes. As noted above, behavior, rather than circadian physiological alteration, may play a
more predominant role in the latter (earlier DLMO) group. Given this, phase markers may
ultimately demonstrate more value for optimization of treatment timing and/or as a measure of
treatment response.

Functional Consequences of Delayed Sleep Phase Type
Excessive early day sleepiness is prominent. Extreme and prolonged difficulty awakening with




<<<PAGE 634>>>

Associated Features
Individuals with advanced sleep phase type are “morning types,” having earlier sleep-wake
times, with the timing of circadian biomarkers such as melatonin and core body temperature
rhythms occurring 2–4 hours earlier than normal. When required to keep a conventional schedule
requiring a delay of bedtime, these individuals will continue to have an early rise time, leading to
persistent sleep deprivation and daytime sleepiness. Use of hypnotics or alcohol to combat sleepmaintenance insomnia and stimulants to reduce daytime sleepiness may lead to substance abuse
in these individuals.

Prevalence
The estimated prevalence of advanced sleep phase type is approximately 1% in middle-age
adults in the United States. Sleep-wake times and circadian phase advance in older individuals
probably account for the higher prevalence in this population.

Development and Course
Onset is usually in late adulthood, although in the familial form, onset can be earlier (during
childhood or early adulthood). The course is typically persistent, lasting more than 3 months, but
the severity may increase depending on work and social schedules. The advanced sleep phase
type is more common in older adults.
Clinical expression may vary across the life span depending on social, school, and work
obligations. Individuals who can alter their work schedules to accommodate the advanced
circadian sleep and wake timing can experience remission of symptoms. Increasing age tends to
advance the sleep phase. However, it is unclear whether the common age-associated advanced
sleep phase type is attributable solely to a change in circadian timing (as seen in the familial
form) or also to age-related changes in the homeostatic regulation of sleep, resulting in earlier
awakening. Severity, remission, and relapse of symptoms are dependent on adherence to
behavioral and environmental treatments designed to control sleep and wake structure and light
exposure.
447

Risk and Prognostic Factors
Environmental.

Decreased late afternoon/early evening exposure to light and/or increased
exposure to early-morning light because of early-morning awakening can increase the risk of
advanced sleep phase type by advancing circadian rhythms. By going to bed early, these
individuals are not exposed to light in the phase delay region of the curve, resulting in
perpetuation of advanced phase. In familial advanced sleep phase type, a shortening of the
endogenous circadian period can result in an advanced sleep phase, although circadian period
does not appear to systematically decrease with age.
Genetic and physiological. Advanced sleep phase type has demonstrated an autosomal dominant
mode of inheritance, including a PER2 gene mutation causing hypophosphorylation of the PER2
protein and a missense mutation in CKI.




<<<PAGE 638>>>

physical activity cues may contribute to a free-running circadian rhythm. With the high
frequency of mental disorders involving social isolation and cases of non-24-hour sleep-wake
type developing after a change in sleep habits (e.g., night shift work, job loss), behavioral factors
in combination with physiological tendency may precipitate and perpetuate this disorder in
sighted individuals. Hospitalized individuals with neurological and psychiatric disorders can
become insensitive to social cues, predisposing them to the development of non-24-hour sleepwake type.
Genetic and physiological.

Blindness is a risk factor for non-24-hour sleep-wake type. Non-24hour sleep-wake type has been associated with traumatic brain injury.

Diagnostic Markers
Diagnosis is confirmed by history and sleep diary or actigraphy for an extended period.
Sequential measurement of phase markers (e.g., melatonin) can help determine circadian phase
in both sighted and blind individuals.
450

Functional Consequences of Non-24-Hour Sleep-Wake Type
Complaints of insomnia (sleep onset and sleep maintenance), excessive sleepiness, or both are
prominent. The unpredictability of sleep and wake times (typically a daily delay drift) results in
difficulty attending school or maintaining a steady job and may increase potential for social
isolation.

Differential Diagnosis
Other circadian rhythm sleep-wake disorders.

In sighted individuals, non-24-hour sleep-wake type
should be differentiated from delayed sleep phase type, as individuals with delayed sleep phase
type may display a similar progressive delay in sleep period for several days.
Depressive disorders. Depressive disorders may result in similar circadian dysregulation and
symptoms.

Comorbidity
Blindness is often comorbid with non-24-hour sleep-wake type, as are depressive and bipolar
disorders with social isolation.

Shift Work Type
Diagnostic Features
Diagnosis is primarily based on a history of the individual working outside of the normal 8:00
A.M. to 6:00 P.M. daytime window (particularly at night) on a regularly scheduled (i.e., nonovertime) basis. Symptoms of excessive sleepiness at work, and impaired sleep at home, on a
persistent basis are prominent. Presence of both sets of symptoms are usually required for a
diagnosis of shift work type. Typically, when the individual reverts to a day-work routine,




<<<PAGE 651>>>

PTSD or acute stress disorder.

Nightmares in which the content or affect of the dream is related to
a traumatic event may be a component of PTSD or acute stress disorder. An additional diagnosis
of nightmare disorder may be warranted if the severity or frequency of the nightmares
necessitates independent clinical attention.
Narcolepsy. Nightmares are a frequent complaint in narcolepsy, but the presence of excessive
sleepiness, with or without cataplexy, differentiates this condition from nightmare disorder.
Sleep-related seizures. Nocturnal seizures usually involve stereotyped motor activity. Associated
nightmares, if recalled, are often also repetitively stereotyped in nature or reflect epileptogenic
features such as the content of diurnal auras, phosphenes (visual sensations in the absence of
light input), or ictal imagery.
Breathing-related sleep disorders. Breathing-related sleep disorders can lead to awakenings with
autonomic arousal, but these are not usually accompanied by recall of nightmares.
Panic disorder. Panic attacks arising during sleep can produce abrupt awakenings with autonomic
arousal and fearfulness, but nightmares are typically not reported and symptoms are similar to
panic attacks arising during wakefulness.
Sleep-related dissociative disorders. Individuals may recall actual physical or emotional trauma as
a “dream” during electroencephalography-documented awakenings.
Substance or medication use. Numerous substances/medications can precipitate nightmares,
including dopaminergic drugs; β-adrenergic antagonists and other antihypertensives;
amphetamine-type substances, cocaine, and other stimulants; antidepressants; smoking cessation
aids; and melatonin. Withdrawal of REM sleep–suppressant medications
461
(e.g., antidepressants) and alcohol can produce REM sleep rebound accompanied by nightmares.
If nightmares are sufficiently severe to warrant independent clinical attention, a diagnosis of
substance/medication-induced sleep disorder should be considered.

Comorbidity
Nightmares may be comorbid with several medical conditions, including coronary heart disease,
cancer, parkinsonism, and pain, and can accompany medical treatments, such as hemodialysis, or
withdrawal from medications or substances of abuse. Nightmares frequently co-occur with other
mental disorders, including PTSD, acute stress disorder, insomnia disorder, REM sleep behavior
disorder, and psychotic, mood, anxiety, adjustment, and personality disorders, as well as with
grief during bereavement. A concurrent nightmare disorder diagnosis should only be considered
when independent clinical attention is warranted. These conditions should be listed with the
appropriate comorbid category specifier (e.g., “with REM sleep behavior disorder”); see also
“Recording Procedures.”

Relationship to International Classification of Sleep Disorders
The International Classification of Sleep Disorders, 3rd Edition, presents similar diagnostic
criteria for nightmare disorder.




<<<PAGE 1329>>>

contextual information in DSM-5-TR on, 27
for delirium, 677
for depressive disorder due to another medical condition, 208
for encopresis, 404
for neurocognitive disorders, 698, 701, 710, 720, 723, 725, 728
for panic disorder, 240
for pedophilic disorder, 795
for pica, 373
for premenstrual dysphoric disorder, 199
for sexual dysfunctions, 484, 504
for sleep-wake disorders, 414–415, 419–420, 426–427, 433, 438, 441, 455, 459, 463, 467
for substance use disorders, 130, 205, 257, 293, 473, 638, 648, 716
for suicidal behavior disorder, 922
for trichotillomania, 283
Diazepam, 630
Diet, and dieting, 394, 395, 403. See also Appetite; Food preferences; Malnutrition; Mineral deficiencies
Differences of sex development (DSDs), 511, 517, 518
Differential diagnosis. See also specific disorders
alternative explanations for personality pathology and, 883
contextual information in DSM-5-TR, 27
cultural concepts of distress and, 873
provisional diagnosis and, 24
substance/medication-induced mental disorders and, 552
Dimensional approach
to diagnosis, 14–15, 35, 734
to personality traits, 892–893
Diminished emotional expression, and negative symptoms, 102–103
Dim light melatonin onset (DLMO), 445
Disability. See also Distress
generalized anxiety disorder and, 253
major or mild neurocognitive disorder due to Huntington’s disease and, 728–729
personality change due to another medical condition and, 777
World Health Organization Disability Assessment Schedule and, 854
Discontinuation, of antidepressants, 818
Discrimination. See also Bias; Oppression; Racism
alcohol use disorder and, 556, 557
coding for, 832
conduct disorder and, 535
disruptive mood dysregulation disorder and, 180
focus on in DSM-5-TR, 18–19
gender dysphoria and, 519
generalized anxiety disorder and, 253
impact of on psychiatric diagnosis, 17–18
major depressive disorder and, 189, 190
misdiagnosis of schizophrenia and, 18, 116, 118, 119, 147
panic disorder and, 238
paranoid delusions and, 101
paranoid personality disorder and, 739
PTSD and, 308, 310
revision process for DSM-5 and, 11
social anxiety disorder and, 232
tobacco-related disorders and, 648
Disinhibited social engagement disorder, 295, 298–301
Disinhibition, behavioral
cannabis use disorder and, 579
disruptive, impulse-control, and conduct disorders, 522
inhalant use disorder and, 604
major or mild frontotemporal neurocognitive disorder and, 696
as personality trait, 893, 900–901
social engagement disorder and, 299


