<<<PAGE 663>>>

prescribed), no accompanying substance use disorder is noted (e.g., F19.982 bupropion-induced
sleep disorder, with onset during medication use, insomnia type). When more than one substance
is judged to play a significant role in the development of the sleep disturbance, each should be
listed separately (e.g., F10.282 severe alcohol use disorder with alcohol-induced sleep disorder,
with onset during intoxication, insomnia type; F14.282 severe cocaine use disorder with cocaineinduced sleep disorder, with onset during intoxication, insomnia type).

Specifiers
Depending on the substance involved, one of four types of sleep disturbances is indicated.
Insomnia type and daytime sleepiness type are most common, whereas parasomnia type is seen
less often. The mixed type is noted when more than one type of sleep disturbance–related
symptom is present and none predominates.

Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of substance/medication-induced sleep disorder is a prominent sleep
disturbance that is sufficiently severe to warrant independent clinical attention (Criterion A). The
sleep disturbance may be characterized by insomnia, daytime sleepiness, a parasomnia, or some
combination of these. The sleep disturbance is judged to be primarily associated with the
pharmacological effects of a substance (i.e., a drug of abuse, a medication, toxin exposure)
(Criterion B). The disturbance must not be better explained by another sleep disorder that is not
substance/medication-induced (Criterion C). A substance/medication-induced sleep disorder is
distinguished from insomnia disorder or a disorder associated with excessive daytime sleepiness
by considering onset and course. For drugs of abuse, there must be evidence of intoxication or
withdrawal from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings.
Substance/medication-induced sleep disorder arises only in association with intoxication or
discontinuation/withdrawal states, whereas other sleep disorders may precede the onset of
substance use or occur during times of sustained abstinence. As discontinuation/withdrawal
states for some substances can be protracted, onset of the sleep disturbance can occur 4 weeks
after cessation of substance use, and the disturbance may have features atypical of other sleep
disorders (e.g., atypical age at onset or course). The diagnosis is not made if the sleep
disturbance occurs only during a delirium (Criterion D). The symptoms must cause clinically
significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning
(Criterion E). This diagnosis should be made instead of a diagnosis of substance intoxication or
substance withdrawal only when the symptoms in Criterion A predominate in the clinical picture
and when the symptoms warrant independent clinical attention.
471

Associated Features
During periods of substance/medication use, intoxication, or withdrawal, individuals frequently
complain of dysphoric mood, including depression and anxiety, irritability, cognitive
impairment, inability to concentrate, and fatigue.
Prominent and severe sleep disturbances can occur in association with intoxication with the
following classes of substances: alcohol; caffeine; cannabis; opioids; sedatives, hypnotics, or




<<<PAGE 708>>>

receiving the medication (or during withdrawal, if a withdrawal is associated with the
medication). Once the treatment is discontinued, the sexual dysfunction will usually improve or
remit within days to several weeks (depending on the half-life of the substance/medication and
the presence of withdrawal). The diagnosis of substance/medication-induced sexual dysfunction
should not be given if the onset of the sexual dysfunction precedes the substance/medication
intoxication or withdrawal, or if the symptoms persist for a substantial period of time (i.e.,
usually longer than 1 month) from the time of severe intoxication or withdrawal.

Associated Features
Sexual dysfunctions can occur in association with intoxication with the following classes of
substances: alcohol; opioids; sedatives, hypnotics, or anxiolytics; stimulants (including cocaine);
and other (or unknown) substances. Sexual dysfunctions can occur in association with
withdrawal from the following classes of substances: alcohol; opioids; sedatives, hypnotics, or
anxiolytics; and other (or unknown) substances. Medications that can induce sexual dysfunctions
include antidepressants, antipsychotics, and hormonal contraceptives.
The most commonly reported side effect of antidepressant drugs is difficulty with orgasm or
ejaculation in men, and with arousal in women. Problems with desire and erection are less
frequent. There is evidence that the effects of antidepressant medications on sexual dysfunction
occur regardless of levels of depression. Approximately 30% of sexual complaints are clinically
significant. Certain agents (i.e., bupropion, mirtazapine, nefazodone, and vilazodone) appear to
have lower rates of sexual side effects than other antidepressants.
The sexual problems associated with antipsychotic drugs, including problems with sexual
desire, erection, lubrication, ejaculation, or orgasm, have occurred with typical as well as
atypical agents. However, problems are less common with prolactin-sparing antipsychotics or
those that do not block dopamine receptors.
Although the effects of mood stabilizers on sexual function are unclear, it is possible that
lithium and anticonvulsants, with the possible exception of lamotrigine, have adverse effects on
sexual desire. Problems with orgasm may occur with gabapentin. Similarly, there may be a
higher prevalence of erectile and orgasm problems associated with benzodiazepines. There have
not been such reports with buspirone.
Many nonpsychiatric medications, such as cardiovascular, cytotoxic, gastrointestinal, and
hormonal agents, are associated with disturbances in sexual function. Use of 5-α-reductase
inhibitors (e.g., dutasteride, finasteride) may reduce erectile function, ejaculatory function, and
libido in men.
Illicit substance use is associated with decreased sexual desire, erectile dysfunction, and
difficulty reaching orgasm. Sexual dysfunctions are also seen in individuals receiving methadone
but are seldom reported by individuals receiving buprenorphine. Chronic nicotine or chronic
alcohol abuse are associated with erectile problems. Cannabis, like alcohol, is a central nervous
system depressant, and its use may be a risk factor for sexual dysfunction; however, it has also
been suggested to potentially improve satisfaction with orgasm.

Prevalence
The prevalence and the incidence of substance/medication-induced sexual dysfunction are
unclear, likely because of underreporting of treatment-emergent sexual side effects. Data on


