<<<PAGE 241>>>

withdrawal; cannabis intoxication; sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic withdrawal; and stimulant
intoxication).
A substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder is distinguished from an independent
psychotic disorder by considering the onset, course, and other factors. For drugs of abuse, there
must be evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings of substance use,
intoxication, or withdrawal. Substance/medication-induced psychotic disorders arise during or
soon after exposure to or withdrawal from a medication or after substance intoxication or
withdrawal but can persist for weeks, whereas independent psychotic disorders may precede the
onset of substance/medication use or may occur during times of sustained abstinence. Once
initiated, the psychotic symptoms may continue as long as the substance/medication use
continues. Another consideration is the presence of features that are atypical of an independent
psychotic disorder (e.g., atypical age at onset or course). For example, the appearance of
delusions de novo in a male person older than 35 years without a known history of an
independent psychotic disorder should suggest the possibility of a substance/medication-induced
psychotic disorder. Even a prior history of an independent psychotic disorder does not rule out
the possibility of a substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder. In contrast, factors that
suggest that the psychotic symptoms are better accounted for by an independent psychotic
disorder include persistence of psychotic symptoms for a substantial period of time (i.e., a month
or more) after the end of substance intoxication or acute substance withdrawal or after cessation
of medication use; or a history of prior recurrent independent psychotic disorders. Other causes
of psychotic symptoms must be considered even in an individual with substance intoxication or
withdrawal, because substance use problems are not uncommon among individuals with nonsubstance/medication-induced psychotic disorders.
In addition to the two symptom domain areas identified in the diagnostic criteria (i.e.,
delusions and hallucinations), the assessment of cognition, depression, and mania symptom
domains is vital for making critically important distinctions between the various schizophrenia
spectrum and other psychotic disorders.
129

Associated Features
Psychotic disorders can occur in association with intoxication with the following classes of
substances: alcohol; cannabis; hallucinogens, including phencyclidine and related substances;
inhalants; sedatives, hypnotics, and anxiolytics; stimulants (including cocaine); and other (or
unknown) substances. Psychotic disorders can occur in association with withdrawal from the
following classes of substances: alcohol; sedatives, hypnotics, and anxiolytics; and other (or
unknown) substances.
Some of the medications reported to evoke psychotic symptoms include anesthetics and
analgesics, anticholinergic agents, anticonvulsants, antihistamines, antihypertensive and
cardiovascular medications, antimicrobial medications, antiparkinsonian medications,
chemotherapeutic agents (e.g., cyclosporine, procarbazine), corticosteroids, gastrointestinal
medications, muscle relaxants, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medications, other over-thecounter medications (e.g., phenylephrine, pseudoephedrine), antidepressant medication, and
disulfiram. Toxins reported to induce psychotic symptoms include anticholinesterase,




<<<PAGE 763>>>

Some generalizations can be made regarding the categories of substances capable of producing
clinically relevant substance-induced mental disorders. In general, the more sedating drugs
(sedative, hypnotics, or anxiolytics, and alcohol) can produce prominent and clinically
significant depressive disorders during intoxication, while anxiety conditions are likely to be
observed during withdrawal syndromes from these substances. Also, during intoxication, the
more stimulating substances (e.g., amphetamines and cocaine) are likely to be associated with
substance-induced psychotic disorders and substance-induced anxiety disorders, and with
substance-induced major depressive episodes observed during withdrawal. Both the more
sedating and the more stimulating drugs are likely to produce significant but temporary sleep and
sexual disturbances. An overview of the relationship between specific categories of substances
and specific psychiatric syndromes is presented in Table 1.
The medication-induced conditions include what are often idiosyncratic CNS reactions or
relatively extreme examples of side effects for a wide range of medications taken for a variety of
medical concerns. These include neurocognitive complications of anesthetics, antihistamines,
antihypertensives, and a variety of other medications and toxins (e.g., organophosphates,
insecticides, carbon monoxide), as described in the chapter on neurocognitive disorders.
Psychotic syndromes may be temporarily experienced in the context of anticholinergic,
cardiovascular, and steroid drugs, as well as during use of stimulant-like and depressant-like
prescription or over-the-counter drugs. Temporary but severe mood disturbances can be observed
with a wide range of medications, including steroids, antihypertensives, disulfiram, and any
prescription or over-the-counter depressant or stimulant-like substances. A similar range of
medications can be associated with temporary anxiety syndromes, sexual dysfunctions, and
conditions of disturbed sleep.
In general, to be considered a substance/medication-induced mental disorder, there must be
evidence that the symptoms being observed are not likely to be better explained by an
independent mental disorder. The latter is more likely to be the case if the symptoms were
present before the severe intoxication or withdrawal or medication administration, or, with the
exception of several substance-induced persisting disorders listed in 1, continued more than 1
month after cessation of acute withdrawal, severe intoxication, or use of the medications. When
symptoms are only observed during a substance-induced delirium (e.g., alcohol withdrawal
delirium), only the delirium should be diagnosed, and other psychiatric symptoms occurring
during the delirium should not also be diagnosed separately, as many of these symptoms (e.g.,
disturbances in mood, anxiety, reality testing) are commonly seen during agitated, confused
states. The features associated with each relevant major mental disorder are similar whether
observed with independent or substance/medication-induced mental disorders. However,
individuals with substance/medication-induced mental disorders are likely to also demonstrate
the associated features seen with the specific category of substance or medication, as listed in
other subsections of this chapter.

Development and Course
Substance-induced mental disorders develop in the context of intoxication with or withdrawal
from substances of abuse, whereas medication-induced mental disorders can be seen with
prescribed or over-the-counter medications that are taken at the suggested doses.


