<<<PAGE 356>>>

cultural contexts with respect to the age at which it is expected that offspring should leave the
parental home. Youth vary in their self-reports of separation anxiety symptoms; for instance,
Taiwanese youth endorse higher symptoms of separation anxiety compared with U.S. youth. It is
important to differentiate separation anxiety disorder from the high value some cultural
communities place on strong interdependence among family members.

Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
Separation anxiety disorder in children and adolescents may be associated with an increased risk
for suicide, although this association is not specific to separation anxiety disorder and is found in
other anxiety disorders where there is significant comorbidity. A large twin study showed that
being bullied during childhood was a risk factor for suicidal thoughts during young adulthood.

Functional Consequences of Separation Anxiety Disorder
Individuals with separation anxiety disorder often limit independent activities away from home
or attachment figures (e.g., in children, avoiding school, not going to camp, having difficulty
sleeping alone; in adolescents, not going away to college; in adults, not leaving the parental
home, not traveling long distances without their close attachments, not working outside the
home). Symptoms in adults are often debilitating and affect multiple areas of their lives. For
example, adults with separation anxiety disorder may deliberately reorganize their work
schedules and other activities because of their anxieties about possible separations from close
attachment figures; they may often express frustration with the limitations on their lives because
of their need to maintain proximity to, or at least virtual contact with, their key attachment
figures (e.g., by texting or phoning them repeatedly throughout the day). Separation anxiety
disorder is associated with greater reported impairment in individuals from high- and uppermiddle-income countries compared with those from low- and lower-middle-income countries.

Differential Diagnosis
Generalized anxiety disorder.

Separation anxiety disorder is distinguished from generalized anxiety
disorder in that the anxiety in separation anxiety disorder predominantly concerns real or
imagined separation from attachment figures. Furthermore, if other worries occur, they are not
excessive.
Panic disorder. In separation anxiety disorder, threats of separation from close attachments may
lead to extreme anxiety and panic attacks. In contrast to panic disorder, where panic attacks
occur unexpectedly and are usually accompanied by fears of dying or going “crazy,” the panic
attacks in separation anxiety disorder occur in anticipation of real or imagined separations from
attachment figures or places of safety and security, or from worries that untoward events will
befall the individual’s close attachments.
Agoraphobia. Unlike individuals with agoraphobia, those with separation anxiety disorder are not
anxious about being trapped or incapacitated in situations from which escape is perceived as
difficult in the event of panic-like symptoms or other incapacitating symptoms. Instead, they fear
being away from places of safety associated with their major attachment figures.
221




<<<PAGE 366>>>

falling in older adults can lead to reduced mobility and reduced physical and social functioning,
and may lead to receiving formal or informal home support. The distress and impairment caused
by specific phobias tend to increase with the number of feared objects and situations. Thus, an
individual who fears four objects or situations is likely to have more impairment in his or her
occupational and social roles and a lower quality of life than an individual who fears only one
object or situation. Individuals with blood-injection-injury specific phobia are often reluctant to
obtain medical care even when a medical concern is present. Additionally, fear of vomiting and
choking may substantially reduce dietary intake.

Differential Diagnosis
Agoraphobia.

Situational specific phobia may resemble agoraphobia in its clinical presentation,
given the overlap in feared situations (e.g., flying, enclosed places, elevators). If an individual
fears only one of the agoraphobic situations, then specific phobia, situational, may be diagnosed.
If two or more agoraphobic situations are feared, a diagnosis of agoraphobia is likely warranted.
For example, an individual who fears airplanes and elevators (which overlap with the “public
transportation” agoraphobic situation) but does not fear other agoraphobic situations would be
diagnosed with specific phobia, situational, whereas an individual who fears airplanes, elevators,
and crowds (which overlap with two agoraphobic situations, “using public transportation” and
“standing in line or being in a crowd”) would be diagnosed with agoraphobia. Criterion B of
agoraphobia (the situations are feared or avoided “because of thoughts that escape might be
difficult or help might not be available in the event of developing panic-like symptoms or other
incapacitating or embarrassing symptoms”) can also be useful in differentiating agoraphobia
from specific phobia. If the situations are feared for reasons other than not being able to escape
or get help, such as fear of being harmed directly by the object or situation (e.g., fear of the plane
crashing, fear of the animal biting), a specific phobia diagnosis may be more appropriate.
Social anxiety disorder. If the situations are feared because of negative evaluation, social anxiety
disorder should be diagnosed instead of specific phobia.
Separation anxiety disorder. If the situations are feared because of separation from a primary
caregiver or attachment figure, separation anxiety disorder should be diagnosed instead of
specific phobia.
229
Panic disorder.

Individuals with specific phobia may experience panic attacks when confronted
with their feared situation or object. A diagnosis of specific phobia would be given if the panic
attacks only occurred in response to the specific object or situation, whereas a diagnosis of panic
disorder would be given if the individual also experienced panic attacks that were unexpected
(i.e., not in response to the specific phobia object or situation).
Obsessive-compulsive disorder. If an individual’s primary fear or anxiety is of an object or
situation as a result of obsessions (e.g., fear of blood due to obsessive thoughts about
contamination from blood-borne pathogens [i.e., HIV]; fear of driving due to obsessive images
of harming others), and if other diagnostic criteria for obsessive-compulsive disorder are met,
then obsessive-compulsive disorder should be diagnosed.




<<<PAGE 372>>>

relieve symptoms of the disorder. Paruresis is more common in men.

Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
Among U.S. adolescents, social anxiety disorder has been reported to increase the risk for active
suicidal thoughts and suicide attempts in Latinx but not in non-Latinx Whites, independently of
the effect of major depression and family income.

Functional Consequences of Social Anxiety Disorder
Social anxiety disorder is associated with elevated rates of school dropout and with decreased
well-being, employment, workplace productivity, socioeconomic status, and quality of life.
Social anxiety disorder is also associated with being single, unmarried, or divorced and with not
having children, particularly among men, whereas women are more likely to be unemployed.
Social anxiety disorder is also negatively associated with friendship quality, such that individuals
with social anxiety disorder report having friendships that are less close and less supportive than
persons without the disorder. In older adults, there may be impairment in caregiving duties and
volunteer activities. Social anxiety disorder also impedes leisure activities. Despite the extent of
distress and social impairment associated with social anxiety disorder, only about half of
individuals with the disorder in high-income societies ever seek treatment, and they tend to do so
only after 15–20 years of experiencing symptoms. Not being employed is a strong predictor for
the persistence of social anxiety disorder.

Differential Diagnosis
Normative shyness.

Shyness (i.e., social reticence) is a common personality trait and is not by
itself pathological. In some societies, shyness is even evaluated positively. However, when there
is a significant adverse impact on social, occupational, and other important areas of functioning,
a diagnosis of social anxiety disorder should be considered, and when full diagnostic criteria for
social anxiety disorder are met, the disorder should be diagnosed. Only a minority (12%) of selfidentified shy individuals in the United States have symptoms that meet diagnostic criteria for
social anxiety disorder.
Agoraphobia. Individuals with agoraphobia may fear and avoid social situations (e.g., going to a
movie) because escape might be difficult or help might not be available in the event of
incapacitation or panic-like symptoms, whereas individuals with social anxiety disorder are most
fearful of scrutiny by others. Moreover, individuals with social anxiety disorder are likely to be
calm when left entirely alone, which is often not the case in agoraphobia.
234
Panic disorder.

Individuals with social anxiety disorder may have panic attacks, but the panic
attacks are always cued by social situations and do not occur “out of the blue.” Additionally,
individuals with social anxiety disorder are more likely to be distressed by fear of negative
evaluation stemming from a panic attack than by the panic attacks themselves.
Generalized anxiety disorder. Social worries are common in generalized anxiety disorder, but the
focus is more on the nature of ongoing relationships rather than on fear of negative evaluation.




<<<PAGE 377>>>

public transportation, or shopping. If agoraphobia is present, a separate diagnosis of agoraphobia
is given.

Associated Features
In addition to worry about panic attacks and their consequences, many individuals with panic
disorder report constant or intermittent feelings of anxiety that are more broadly related to health
and mental health concerns. For example, individuals with panic disorder often anticipate a
catastrophic outcome from a mild physical symptom or medication side effect (e.g., thinking that
they may have heart disease or that a headache means presence of a brain tumor). Such
individuals often are relatively intolerant of medication side effects. In addition, there may be
pervasive concerns about abilities to complete daily tasks or withstand daily stressors, excessive
use of drugs (e.g., alcohol, prescribed medications or illicit drugs) to control panic attacks, or
extreme behaviors aimed at controlling panic attacks (e.g., severe restrictions on food intake or
avoidance of specific foods or medications because of concerns about physical symptoms that
provoke panic attacks).

Prevalence
In the general population, the 12-month prevalence estimate for panic disorder across the United
States and several European countries is about 2%–3% in adults and adolescents. The global
lifetime prevalence is estimated at 1.7%, with a 2.7% projected lifetime risk in the World Mental
Health Surveys. In the United States, significantly lower prevalence estimates of panic disorder
are reported among Latinx, African Americans, Caribbean Blacks, and Asian Americans,
compared with non-Latinx Whites. Prevalence estimates of panic disorder in American Indians
range from 2.6% to 4.1%. Lower estimates have been reported for Asian, African, and Latin
American countries, ranging from 0.1% to 0.8%. Women are more frequently affected than men,
at a rate of approximately 2:1. The gender differentiation occurs in adolescence and is already
observable before age 14 years. Although panic attacks occur in children, the overall prevalence
of panic disorder is low before age 14 years (<0.4%). The rates of panic disorder show a gradual
increase during adolescence and possibly following the onset of puberty, and peak during
adulthood. The prevalence declines in older individuals (i.e., 1.2% in adults older than age 55,
0.7% in adults older than age 64), possibly reflecting diminishing severity to subclinical levels.
238

Development and Course
The median age at onset for panic disorder in the United States is 20–24 years, and crossnationally is 32 years. The mean age at onset is 34.7 years. A small number of cases begin in
childhood, and onset after age 55 years is unusual but can occur. The usual course, if the disorder
is untreated, is chronic but waxing and waning. Some individuals may have episodic outbreaks
with years of remission in between, and others may have continuous severe symptomatology.
According to a longitudinal study in the Netherlands, about one-quarter of the individuals with
panic disorder experienced recurrence of symptoms within the initial 2-year follow-up period.
Only a minority of individuals have full remission without subsequent relapse within a few
years. The course of panic disorder typically is complicated by a range of other disorders, in




<<<PAGE 380>>>

disorder criteria may be endorsed only when there is substantial severity and impairment. The
rate of mental health service use for panic disorder varies across ethnoracial groups.

Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
The rate of panic disorder is nearly twofold higher in women compared with men. Relapse from
panic disorder also occurs more frequently in adult women compared with men,
240
suggesting that women have a more unstable illness course. Gender differences in clinical course
are also found among adolescents. Panic disorder has a larger impact on health-related quality of
life in women than in men, which may be attributable to greater anxiety sensitivity among some
women or greater comorbidity with agoraphobia and depression. There is some evidence for
sexual dimorphism, with high expression of MAOA-uVNTR alleles potentially acting as a
female-specific risk factor for panic disorder.

Diagnostic Markers
Individuals with panic disorder exhibit an attentional bias to threatening stimuli. Panic attacks
may be provoked by agents with disparate mechanisms of action, such as sodium lactate,
caffeine, isoproterenol, yohimbine, CO2, and cholecystokinin, to a much greater extent in
individuals with panic disorder than in those without it. There is considerable interest in the
relationship between panic disorder and sensitivity to these panic-provoking agents. While none
of the data suggest diagnostic utility, data for sensitivity to respiratory stimulation reflect some
level of specificity for panic disorder and related conditions, such as separation anxiety disorder.
Chronically higher baseline hyperventilation and rate of sighing may occur among individuals
with panic disorder. However, none of these laboratory findings are considered diagnostic of
panic disorder.

Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
Panic attacks and a diagnosis of panic disorder in the past 12 months are related to a higher rate
of suicidal behavior and suicidal thoughts in the past 12 months even when comorbidity and a
history of childhood abuse and other suicide risk factors are taken into account. Approximately
25% of primary care patients with panic disorder report suicidal thoughts. Panic disorder may
increase risk for future suicidal behaviors but not deaths.
Epidemiological survey data of panic attack symptoms show that the cognitive symptoms of
panic (e.g., derealization) may be associated with suicidal thoughts, whereas physical symptoms
(e.g., dizziness, nausea) may be associated with suicidal behaviors.

Functional Consequences of Panic Disorder
Panic disorder is associated with high levels of social, occupational, and physical disability;
considerable economic costs; and the highest number of medical visits among the anxiety
disorders, although the effects are strongest with the presence of agoraphobia. Individuals with
panic disorder may be frequently absent from work or school for doctor and emergency room




<<<PAGE 382>>>

social situations in social anxiety disorder, by phobic objects or situations in specific phobia or
agoraphobia, by worry in generalized anxiety disorder, by separation from home or attachment
figures in separation anxiety disorder) and thus would not meet criteria for panic disorder. (Note:
Sometimes an unexpected panic attack is associated with the onset of another anxiety disorder,
but then the attacks become expected, whereas panic disorder is characterized by recurrent
unexpected panic attacks.) If the panic attacks occur only in response to specific triggers, then
only the relevant anxiety disorder is assigned. However, if the individual experiences unexpected
panic attacks as well and shows persistent concern and worry or behavioral change because of
the attacks, then an additional diagnosis of panic disorder should be considered.

Comorbidity
Panic disorder infrequently occurs in clinical settings in the absence of other psychopathology. In
the general population, 80% of individuals with panic disorder had a lifetime comorbid mental
diagnosis. The prevalence of panic disorder is elevated in individuals with other disorders,
particularly other anxiety disorders (and especially agoraphobia), major depressive disorder,
bipolar I and bipolar II disorder, and possibly mild alcohol use disorder. While panic disorder
occasionally has an earlier age at onset than the comorbid disorder(s), onset often occurs after the
comorbid disorder and may be seen as a severity marker of the comorbid illness.
Reported lifetime rates of comorbidity between major depressive disorder and panic disorder
vary widely, ranging from 10% to 65% in individuals with panic disorder. In approximately onethird of individuals with both disorders, the depression precedes the onset of panic disorder. In
the remaining two-thirds, depression occurs coincident with or following the onset of panic
disorder. A subset of individuals with panic disorder develop a
242
substance-related disorder, which for some represents an attempt to treat their anxiety with
alcohol or medications. Comorbidity with other anxiety disorders and illness anxiety disorder is
also common.
Panic disorder is significantly comorbid with numerous general medical symptoms and
conditions, including, but not limited to, dizziness, cardiac arrhythmias, hyperthyroidism,
asthma, COPD, and irritable bowel syndrome. However, the nature of the association (e.g., cause
and effect) between panic disorder and these conditions remains unclear. Although mitral valve
prolapse and thyroid disease are more common among individuals with panic disorder than in the
general population, the increases in prevalence are not consistent.

Panic Attack Specifier
Note: Symptoms are presented for the purpose of identifying a panic attack;
however, panic attack is not a mental disorder and cannot be coded. Panic attacks
can occur in the context of any anxiety disorder as well as other mental disorders
(e.g., depressive disorders, posttraumatic stress disorder, substance use disorders)
and some medical conditions (e.g., cardiac, respiratory, vestibular, gastrointestinal).
When the presence of a panic attack is identified, it should be noted as a specifier




<<<PAGE 387>>>

Substance/medication-induced anxiety disorder.

Intoxication with central nervous system stimulants
(e.g., cocaine, amphetamine-type substances, caffeine) or cannabis and withdrawal from central
nervous system depressants (e.g., alcohol, barbiturates) can precipitate a panic attack. A detailed
history should be taken to determine if the individual had panic attacks prior to excessive
substance use. Features such as onset after age 45 years or the presence of atypical symptoms
during a panic attack (e.g., vertigo, loss of consciousness, loss of bladder or bowel control,
slurred speech, or amnesia) suggest the possibility that a medical condition or a substance may
be causing the panic attack symptoms.
Panic disorder. Repeated unexpected panic attacks are required but are not sufficient for the
diagnosis of panic disorder (i.e., full diagnostic criteria for panic disorder must be met).

Comorbidity
Panic attacks are associated with increased likelihood of various comorbid mental disorders,
including anxiety disorders, depressive disorders, bipolar disorders, impulse-control disorders,
and substance use disorders. Panic attacks are associated with increased likelihood of later
developing anxiety disorders, depressive disorders, bipolar disorders, alcohol use disorder, and
possibly other disorders.
246

Agoraphobia
Diagnostic Criteria

F40.00

A. Marked fear or anxiety about two (or more) of the following five situations:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Using public transportation (e.g., automobiles, buses, trains, ships, planes).
Being in open spaces (e.g., parking lots, marketplaces, bridges).
Being in enclosed places (e.g., shops, theaters, cinemas).
Standing in line or being in a crowd.
Being outside of the home alone.

B. The individual fears or avoids these situations because of thoughts that escape
might be difficult or help might not be available in the event of developing paniclike symptoms or other incapacitating or embarrassing symptoms (e.g., fear of
falling in the elderly; fear of incontinence).
C. The agoraphobic situations almost always provoke fear or anxiety.
D. The agoraphobic situations are actively avoided, require the presence of a
companion, or are endured with intense fear or anxiety.
E. The fear or anxiety is out of proportion to the actual danger posed by the
agoraphobic situations and to the sociocultural context.
F. The fear, anxiety, or avoidance is persistent, typically lasting for 6 months or




<<<PAGE 388>>>

more.
G. The fear, anxiety, or avoidance causes clinically significant distress or
impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
H. If another medical condition (e.g., inflammatory bowel disease, Parkinson’s
disease) is present, the fear, anxiety, or avoidance is clearly excessive.
I. The fear, anxiety, or avoidance is not better explained by the symptoms of
another mental disorder—for example, the symptoms are not confined to specific
phobia, situational type; do not involve only social situations (as in social anxiety
disorder); and are not related exclusively to obsessions (as in obsessivecompulsive disorder), perceived defects or flaws in physical appearance (as in
body dysmorphic disorder), reminders of traumatic events (as in posttraumatic
stress disorder), or fear of separation (as in separation anxiety disorder).
Note: Agoraphobia is diagnosed irrespective of the presence of panic disorder. If an
individual’s presentation meets criteria for panic disorder and agoraphobia, both
diagnoses should be assigned.

Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of agoraphobia is marked fear or anxiety triggered by the real or anticipated
exposure to a wide range of situations (Criterion A). The diagnosis requires endorsement of
symptoms occurring in at least two of the following five situations: 1) using public
transportation, such as automobiles, buses, trains, ships, or planes; 2) being in open spaces, such
as parking lots, marketplaces, or bridges; 3) being in enclosed spaces, such as shops, theaters, or
cinemas; 4) standing in line or being in a crowd; or 5) being outside of the home alone. The
examples for each situation are not exhaustive; other situations may be feared. When
experiencing fear and anxiety cued by such situations, individuals typically experience thoughts
that something terrible might happen (Criterion B). Individuals frequently believe that escape
from such situations might be difficult (e.g., “can’t get out of here”) or that help might be
unavailable (e.g., “there is nobody to help me”) when panic-like symptoms or other
incapacitating or embarrassing symptoms occur. “Panic-like symptoms” refer to any of the 13
symptoms included in the criteria for panic attack, such as dizziness, faintness, and fear of dying.
“Other incapacitating or embarrassing symptoms” include
247
symptoms such as vomiting and inflammatory bowel symptoms, as well as, in older adults, a fear
of falling or, in children, a sense of disorientation and getting lost.
The amount of fear experienced may vary with proximity to the feared situation and may
occur in anticipation of or in the actual presence of the agoraphobic situation. Also, the fear or
anxiety may take the form of a full- or limited-symptom panic attack (i.e., an expected panic
attack). Fear or anxiety is evoked nearly every time the individual comes into contact with the
feared situation (Criterion C). Thus, an individual who becomes anxious only occasionally in an
agoraphobic situation (e.g., becomes anxious when standing in line on only one out of every five
occasions) would not be diagnosed with agoraphobia. The individual actively avoids the




<<<PAGE 389>>>

situation, requires the presence of a companion, or, if he or she either is unable or decides not to
avoid it, the situation evokes intense fear or anxiety (Criterion D). Active avoidance means the
individual is currently behaving in ways that are intentionally designed to prevent or minimize
contact with agoraphobic situations. Avoidance can be behavioral (e.g., changing daily routines,
choosing a job nearby to avoid using public transportation, arranging for food delivery to avoid
entering shops and supermarkets) as well as cognitive (e.g., using distraction to get through
agoraphobic situations) in nature. The avoidance can become so severe that the individual is
completely homebound. Often, an individual is better able to confront a feared situation when
accompanied by a companion, such as a partner, friend, or health professional. Also, the
individual may employ safety behaviors (e.g., sitting near exits when taking public transportation
or at the movies) to better endure such situations.
The fear, anxiety, or avoidance must be out of proportion to the actual danger posed by the
agoraphobic situations and to the sociocultural context (Criterion E). Differentiating
disproportionate, clinically significant agoraphobic fears from reasonable fears (e.g., not wanting
to leave the house during a bad storm) or from situations that are deemed dangerous (e.g.,
walking in a parking lot or using public transportation in a high-crime area) is important for a
number of reasons. First, what constitutes avoidance may be difficult to judge across cultures and
sociocultural contexts (e.g., it is socioculturally appropriate for orthodox Muslim women in
certain parts of the world to avoid leaving the house alone, and thus such avoidance would not be
considered indicative of agoraphobia). Second, older adults are likely to overattribute their fears
to age-related constraints and are less likely to judge their fears as being out of proportion to the
actual risk. Third, individuals with agoraphobia are likely to overestimate danger in relation to
panic-like or other bodily symptoms. Agoraphobia should be diagnosed only if the fear, anxiety,
or avoidance is persistent (Criterion F) and if it causes clinically significant distress or
impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning (Criterion G). The
duration of “typically lasting for 6 months or more” is meant to exclude individuals with shortlived, transient problems.

Associated Features
In its most severe forms, agoraphobia can cause individuals to become completely homebound,
unable to leave their home and dependent on others for services or assistance to provide even for
basic needs. Demoralization and depressive symptoms, as well as abuse of alcohol and sedative
medication as inappropriate self-medication strategies, are common.

Prevalence
Every year approximately 1%–1.7% of adolescents and adults worldwide have symptoms that
meet diagnostic criteria for agoraphobia. Women are twice as likely as men to experience
agoraphobia. Agoraphobia may occur in childhood, but incidence peaks in late adolescence and
early adulthood. Studies have shown the 12-month prevalence in individuals living in the United
States who are older than 65 years is 0.4% and 0.5% among individuals in Europe and North
America older than 55 years. Approximately 0.2%–0.8% of
248




<<<PAGE 390>>>

the adult population in various countries has a past 12-month diagnosis of agoraphobia without
panic disorder.

Development and Course
The percentage of individuals with agoraphobia reporting panic attacks or panic disorder
preceding the onset of agoraphobia ranges from 30% in community samples to more than 50% in
clinical samples.
In two-thirds of all cases of agoraphobia, initial onset is before age 35 years, with 21 years
the mean age at onset, although age at onset of agoraphobia without preceding panic attacks or
panic disorder is 25–29 years. First onset in childhood is rare. There is a substantial incidence
risk in adolescence and early adulthood, with indications for a second high incidence risk phase
after age 40 years. Approximately 10% of older adults with agoraphobia reported their first
episode of agoraphobia occurring after age 65.
The course of agoraphobia is typically persistent and chronic. Complete remission is rare
(10%), unless the agoraphobia is treated. Individuals with comorbid panic disorder and
agoraphobia are more likely to experience recurrence of symptoms after a period of remission if
they had an earlier age at onset (< 20 years old). With more severe agoraphobia, rates of full
remission decrease, whereas rates of relapse and chronicity increase. Approximately 36% of
individuals with agoraphobia who achieve remission eventually experience relapse. A range of
other disorders, in particular other anxiety disorders, depressive disorders, substance use
disorders, and personality disorders, may complicate the course of agoraphobia. The long-term
course and outcome of agoraphobia are associated with substantially elevated risk of secondary
major depressive disorder, persistent depressive disorder, and substance use disorders.
The clinical features of agoraphobia are relatively consistent across the life span, although
the type of agoraphobic situations triggering fear, anxiety, or avoidance, as well as the type of
cognitions, may vary. For example, in children, being outside of the home alone is the most
frequent situation feared, whereas in older adults, being in shops, standing in line, and being in
open spaces are most often feared. Also, cognitions often pertain to becoming lost (in children),
to experiencing panic-like symptoms (in adults), to falling (in older adults).
The apparent low prevalence of agoraphobia in children could reflect difficulties in symptom
reporting, and thus assessments in young children may require solicitation of information from
multiple sources, including parents or teachers. Adolescents, particularly boys, may be less
willing than adults to openly discuss agoraphobic fears and avoidance; however, agoraphobia
can occur before adulthood and should be assessed in children and adolescents. In older adults,
comorbid somatic symptom disorder, having medical complications, and motor disturbances
(e.g., a sense of falling) are frequently mentioned by individuals as the reason for their fear and
avoidance. In these instances, care is to be taken in evaluating whether the fear and avoidance are
out of proportion to the real danger involved.

Risk and Prognostic Factors
Temperamental.

Behavioral inhibition, negative affectivity (neuroticism), anxiety sensitivity, and
trait anxiety are closely associated with agoraphobia but are relevant to most anxiety disorders
(specific phobia, social anxiety disorder, panic disorder, generalized anxiety disorder). Anxiety
sensitivity (the disposition to believe that symptoms of anxiety are harmful) is also characteristic




<<<PAGE 391>>>

of individuals with agoraphobia.
Environmental. Negative events in childhood (e.g., separation, death of parent) and other stressful
events, such as being attacked or mugged, are associated with the onset of agoraphobia.
Furthermore, individuals with agoraphobia describe the family climate and child-rearing
behavior as being characterized by reduced warmth and increased overprotection.
249
Genetic and physiological.

Heritability for agoraphobia is 61%. Of the various phobias,
agoraphobia has the strongest and most specific association with the genetic factor that
represents proneness to phobias. Family history of anxiety disorders is associated with an earlier
age at onset of agoraphobia (< 27 years old), and family history of panic disorder in particular is
associated with agoraphobia.

Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Women have different patterns of comorbid disorders than men. Consistent with gender
differences in the prevalence of mental disorders, men have higher rates of comorbid substance
use disorders.

Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
Approximately 15% of individuals with agoraphobia report suicidal thoughts or behavior. For
individuals with panic disorder, symptoms of agoraphobia may be a risk factor for suicidal
thoughts.

Functional Consequences of Agoraphobia
Like most other anxiety disorders, agoraphobia is associated with considerable impairment and
disability in terms of role functioning, work productivity, and disability days. Agoraphobia
severity is a strong determinant of the degree of disability, irrespective of the presence of
comorbid panic disorder, panic attacks, and other comorbid conditions. Individuals with
agoraphobia can be completely homebound or unable to work. Individuals with panic disorder
with agoraphobia who have an early course of onset (< age 20 years) are less likely to be
married.

Differential Diagnosis
Specific phobia, situational type.

Differentiating agoraphobia from situational specific phobia can
be challenging in some cases, because these conditions share several symptom characteristics
and criteria. Specific phobia, situational type, should be diagnosed versus agoraphobia if the fear,
anxiety, or avoidance is limited to one of the agoraphobic situations. Requiring fears from two or
more of the agoraphobic situations is a robust means for differentiating agoraphobia from
specific phobias, particularly the situational subtype. Additional differentiating features include
the content of the individual’s cognitions. Thus, if the situation is feared for reasons other than
panic-like symptoms or other incapacitating or embarrassing symptoms (e.g., fears of being
directly harmed by the situation itself, such as fear of the plane crashing for individuals who fear




<<<PAGE 392>>>

flying), then a diagnosis of specific phobia may be more appropriate.
Separation anxiety disorder.

Separation anxiety disorder can be best differentiated from
agoraphobia by examining the individual’s cognitions. In separation anxiety disorder, the
thoughts are about detachment from significant others and the home environment (i.e., parents or
other attachment figures), whereas in agoraphobia the focus is on panic-like symptoms or other
incapacitating or embarrassing symptoms in the feared situations.
Social anxiety disorder. Agoraphobia should be differentiated from social anxiety disorder based
primarily on the situational clusters that trigger fear, anxiety, or avoidance and the individual’s
cognitions. In social anxiety disorder, the focus is on fear of being negatively evaluated.
Panic disorder. When criteria for panic disorder are met, agoraphobia should not be diagnosed if
the avoidance behaviors associated with the panic attacks do not extend to avoidance of two or
more agoraphobic situations.
250
Acute stress disorder and posttraumatic stress disorder.

Acute stress disorder and posttraumatic
stress disorder (PTSD) can be differentiated from agoraphobia by examining whether the fear,
anxiety, or avoidance is related only to situations that remind the individual of a traumatic event.
If the fear, anxiety, or avoidance is restricted to trauma reminders, and if the avoidance behavior
does not extend to two or more agoraphobic situations, then a diagnosis of agoraphobia is not
warranted.
Major depressive disorder. In major depressive disorder, the individual may avoid leaving home
because of apathy, loss of energy, low self-esteem, and anhedonia. If the avoidance is unrelated
to fears of panic-like or other incapacitating or embarrassing symptoms, then agoraphobia should
not be diagnosed.
Avoidance related to other medical conditions. Individuals with certain medical conditions may
avoid situations because of realistic concerns about being incapacitated (e.g., fainting in an
individual with transient ischemic attacks) or being embarrassed (e.g., diarrhea in an individual
with Crohn’s disease). The diagnosis of agoraphobia should be given only when the fear or
avoidance is clearly in excess of that usually associated with these medical conditions.

Comorbidity
About 90% of individuals with agoraphobia also have other mental disorders. The most frequent
additional diagnoses are other anxiety disorders (e.g., specific phobias, panic disorder, social
anxiety disorder), depressive disorders (major depressive disorder), PTSD, and alcohol use
disorder. Whereas other anxiety disorders (e.g., separation anxiety disorder, specific phobias,
panic disorder) frequently precede onset of agoraphobia, depressive disorders and substance use
disorders typically occur secondary to agoraphobia. In some individuals, a substance use disorder
precedes agoraphobia. Individuals with comorbid agoraphobia and major depressive disorder
tend to have a more treatment-resistant course of agoraphobia relative to individuals with
agoraphobia alone.




<<<PAGE 1020>>>

contrast, individuals who go on to develop avoidant personality disorder may become
increasingly shy and avoidant during adolescence and early adulthood, when social relationships
with new people become especially important. There is some evidence that in adults, avoidant
personality disorder tends to become less evident or to remit with age; the prevalence in adults
older than 65 years has been estimated at 0.8%. This diagnosis should be used with great caution
in children and adolescents, for whom shy and avoidant behavior may be developmentally
appropriate.

Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
There may be variation in the degree to which different cultural and ethnic groups regard
diffidence and avoidance as appropriate. Moreover, avoidant behavior may be the result of
problems in acculturation following migration. In some sociocultural contexts, marked avoidance
might occur following social embarrassment (“loss of face”) or failure to meet major life goals
rather than temperamental shyness. In these settings, the goal of avoidance includes deliberate
minimization of social interactions in order to preserve social harmony or prevent public offense.

Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Avoidant personality disorder appears to be more common in women than in men in community
surveys. This gender difference in prevalence is small but consistently found in large populationbased samples.
767

Differential Diagnosis
Social anxiety disorder.

There appears to be a great deal of overlap between avoidant personality
disorder and social anxiety disorder. It has been suggested that they may represent different
manifestations of similar underlying problems, or avoidant personality disorder may be a more
severe form of social anxiety disorder. However, differences have also been described, especially
in relation to self-concept (such as self-esteem and the sense of inferiority in avoidant personality
disorder); the latter is indirect evidence as it shows that negative self-concept in social anxiety
disorder may be unstable and thus less pervasive and entrenched than in avoidant personality
disorder. Additionally, studies have shown that avoidant personality disorder frequently occurs
in the absence of social anxiety disorder, and some separate risk factors have been identified,
providing support for retaining two separate diagnostic categories.
Agoraphobia. Avoidance characterizes both avoidant personality disorder and agoraphobia, and
they often co-occur. They can be distinguished by the motivation for the avoidance (e.g., fear of
panic or physical harm in agoraphobia).
Other personality disorders and personality traits. Other personality disorders may be confused with
avoidant personality disorder because they have certain features in common. It is, therefore,
important to distinguish among these disorders based on differences in their characteristic
features. However, if an individual has personality features that meet criteria for one or more
personality disorders in addition to avoidant personality disorder, all can be diagnosed. Both
avoidant personality disorder and dependent personality disorder are characterized by feelings of


