<<<PAGE 264>>>

More than 90% of individuals who have a single manic episode go on to have recurrent mood
episodes. Approximately 60% of manic episodes occur immediately before a major depressive
episode. Individuals with bipolar I disorder who have multiple (four or more) mood episodes
(major depressive, manic, or hypomanic) occurring in the prior 12 months receive the specifier
“with rapid cycling,” a common variant associated with poorer outcomes. About half of
individuals diagnosed with bipolar disorder exhibit a predominant polarity (relapse tending to be
either depressive or manic), with one international study of bipolar I disorder finding 31.3% with
predominant mania, 21.4% with predominant depression, and 47.3% without polarity
predominance.
The course of bipolar I disorder is highly heterogeneous. Some patterns have been noted
across episodes (e.g., a manic episode with psychotic features may be associated with psychotic
features in subsequent manic episodes). Polarity of first episode tends to be associated with
predominant polarity of future episodes and clinical features (e.g., depressive onset is associated
with greater density of depressive episodes and suicidal behavior). The
147
presence of mixed features in a manic episode is associated with a poorer prognosis, poorer
lithium response, and suicidal behavior.

Risk and Prognostic Factors
Environmental.

Childhood adversity (including early emotional trauma, parental
psychopathology, and family conflict) is a known risk factor for bipolar disorder and appears to
predispose to early onset of bipolar disorder. Childhood adversity is also associated with poorer
prognosis and a worse clinical picture that may include medical or psychiatric comorbidities,
suicide, and associated psychotic features. More proximally, recent life stress and other negative
life events increase depressive relapse risk in individuals diagnosed with bipolar disorder,
whereas manic relapse appears to be specifically linked to goal-attainment life events (e.g.,
getting married, completing a degree). Cannabis and other substance use is associated with
exacerbation of manic symptoms among individuals diagnosed with bipolar disorder, as well as
first onset of manic symptoms in the general population. There is some evidence that becoming
married is less common among individuals with bipolar disorder than in the general population
and that a diagnosis of bipolar disorder is associated with being previously as opposed to
currently married.
Genetic and physiological. Genetic processes strongly affect predisposition to bipolar disorder,
with heritability estimates around 90% in some twin studies. Risk of bipolar disorder in the
general population is around 1%, while risk in a first-degree relative is 5%–10%. However,
monozygotic concordance rates are significantly less than 100% (40%–70%), indicating that
much risk is left unexplained by genes alone. The mechanism of heritability is not Mendelian,
and involves multiple genes (or more complex genetic mechanisms) of small effect, interacting
with each other, the environment, and random factors. Emerging genetic findings suggest that
mania- and depression-proneness are inherited separately, and bipolar disorder shares a genetic
origin with schizophrenia.




<<<PAGE 401>>>

the medication). Once the treatment is discontinued, the panic or anxiety symptoms will usually
improve or remit within days to several weeks to a month (depending on the half-life of the
substance/medication and the presence of withdrawal). The diagnosis of substance/medicationinduced anxiety disorder should not be given if the onset of the panic or anxiety symptoms
precedes the substance/medication intoxication or withdrawal, or if the symptoms persist for a
substantial period of time (i.e., usually longer than 1 month) from the time of severe intoxication
or withdrawal. If the panic or anxiety symptoms persist for substantial periods of time, other
causes for the symptoms should be considered.
The substance/medication-induced anxiety disorder diagnosis should be made instead of a
diagnosis of substance intoxication or substance withdrawal only when the symptoms in
Criterion A are predominant in the clinical picture and are sufficiently severe to warrant
independent clinical attention.

Associated Features
Panic or anxiety can occur in association with intoxication with the following classes of
substances: alcohol, caffeine, cannabis, phencyclidine, other hallucinogens, inhalants, stimulants
(including cocaine), and other (or unknown) substances. Panic or anxiety can occur in
association with withdrawal from the following classes of substances: alcohol; opioids;
sedatives, hypnotics, and anxiolytics; stimulants (including cocaine); and other (or unknown)
substances. Some medications that evoke anxiety symptoms include anesthetics and analgesics,
sympathomimetics or other bronchodilators, anticholinergics, insulin, thyroid preparations, oral
contraceptives, antihistamines, antiparkinsonian medications, corticosteroids, antihypertensive
and cardiovascular medications, anticonvulsants, lithium carbonate, antipsychotic medications,
and antidepressant medications. Heavy metals and toxins (e.g., organophosphate insecticide,
nerve gases, carbon monoxide, CO2, volatile substances such as gasoline and paint) may also
cause panic or anxiety symptoms.

Prevalence
The prevalence of substance/medication-induced anxiety disorder is not clear. General
population data suggest that it may be rare, with a 12-month prevalence in the United States of
approximately 0.002%. However, in clinical populations, the prevalence is likely to be higher.

Diagnostic Markers
Laboratory assessments (e.g., urine toxicology) may be useful to measure substance intoxication
as part of an assessment for substance/medication-induced anxiety disorder.
258

Differential Diagnosis
Substance intoxication and substance withdrawal.

Anxiety symptoms commonly occur in substance
intoxication and substance withdrawal. The diagnosis of the substance-specific intoxication or
substance-specific withdrawal will usually suffice to categorize the symptom presentation. A
diagnosis of substance/medication-induced anxiety disorder either with onset during intoxication




<<<PAGE 708>>>

receiving the medication (or during withdrawal, if a withdrawal is associated with the
medication). Once the treatment is discontinued, the sexual dysfunction will usually improve or
remit within days to several weeks (depending on the half-life of the substance/medication and
the presence of withdrawal). The diagnosis of substance/medication-induced sexual dysfunction
should not be given if the onset of the sexual dysfunction precedes the substance/medication
intoxication or withdrawal, or if the symptoms persist for a substantial period of time (i.e.,
usually longer than 1 month) from the time of severe intoxication or withdrawal.

Associated Features
Sexual dysfunctions can occur in association with intoxication with the following classes of
substances: alcohol; opioids; sedatives, hypnotics, or anxiolytics; stimulants (including cocaine);
and other (or unknown) substances. Sexual dysfunctions can occur in association with
withdrawal from the following classes of substances: alcohol; opioids; sedatives, hypnotics, or
anxiolytics; and other (or unknown) substances. Medications that can induce sexual dysfunctions
include antidepressants, antipsychotics, and hormonal contraceptives.
The most commonly reported side effect of antidepressant drugs is difficulty with orgasm or
ejaculation in men, and with arousal in women. Problems with desire and erection are less
frequent. There is evidence that the effects of antidepressant medications on sexual dysfunction
occur regardless of levels of depression. Approximately 30% of sexual complaints are clinically
significant. Certain agents (i.e., bupropion, mirtazapine, nefazodone, and vilazodone) appear to
have lower rates of sexual side effects than other antidepressants.
The sexual problems associated with antipsychotic drugs, including problems with sexual
desire, erection, lubrication, ejaculation, or orgasm, have occurred with typical as well as
atypical agents. However, problems are less common with prolactin-sparing antipsychotics or
those that do not block dopamine receptors.
Although the effects of mood stabilizers on sexual function are unclear, it is possible that
lithium and anticonvulsants, with the possible exception of lamotrigine, have adverse effects on
sexual desire. Problems with orgasm may occur with gabapentin. Similarly, there may be a
higher prevalence of erectile and orgasm problems associated with benzodiazepines. There have
not been such reports with buspirone.
Many nonpsychiatric medications, such as cardiovascular, cytotoxic, gastrointestinal, and
hormonal agents, are associated with disturbances in sexual function. Use of 5-α-reductase
inhibitors (e.g., dutasteride, finasteride) may reduce erectile function, ejaculatory function, and
libido in men.
Illicit substance use is associated with decreased sexual desire, erectile dysfunction, and
difficulty reaching orgasm. Sexual dysfunctions are also seen in individuals receiving methadone
but are seldom reported by individuals receiving buprenorphine. Chronic nicotine or chronic
alcohol abuse are associated with erectile problems. Cannabis, like alcohol, is a central nervous
system depressant, and its use may be a risk factor for sexual dysfunction; however, it has also
been suggested to potentially improve satisfaction with orgasm.

Prevalence
The prevalence and the incidence of substance/medication-induced sexual dysfunction are
unclear, likely because of underreporting of treatment-emergent sexual side effects. Data on




<<<PAGE 1070>>>

to antipsychotic medications that block dopamine D2 receptors. MIP occurs at higher rates with
antipsychotics that have higher potency for the dopamine D2 receptor, such as haloperidol,
fluphenazine, and risperidone, but there are no
808
differences in the clinical features of parkinsonism between first- and second-generation
antipsychotics.
Other medications that can cause MIP include calcium channel antagonists (e.g., flunarizine,
cinnarizine), dopamine depleters (e.g., reserpine, tetrabenazine), antiepileptics (e.g., phenytoin,
valproate, levetiracetam), antidepressants (e.g., selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors,
monoamine oxidase inhibitors), lithium, chemotherapeutic drugs (e.g., cystosine arabinoside,
cyclophosphamide, vincristine, doxorubicin, paclitaxel, etoposide), and immunosuppressants
(e.g., cyclosporine, tacrolimus). Toxins (e.g., 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine
[MPTP], organophosphate pesticides, manganese, methanol, cyanide, carbon monoxide, and
carbon disulfide) may also cause MIP.
The time course for development of MIP varies. Usually, MIP develops a few weeks after
starting or raising the dose of a medication known to cause parkinsonism or after reducing an
antiparkinsonian medication (e.g., an anticholinergic agent) that is being used to treat or prevent
medication-induced dystonia or parkinsonian symptoms. However, MIP may also develop
rapidly after starting or raising the dose of a medication or have an insidious onset after many
months of exposure. With antipsychotic medications or other dopamine receptor blocking agents,
MIP typically develops 2–4 weeks after starting the medication and usually by 3 months. Mainly
with calcium channel blockers, a second peak of symptom onset is reported after about 1 year.
Reported rates of MIP are affected by absence of standard diagnostic criteria, incorrect
diagnosis or misattribution of MIP signs to Lewy body disease (e.g., Parkinson’s disease), or a
psychiatric condition, and overall lack of recognition, especially in milder cases. It is estimated
that at least 50% of outpatients receiving long-term antipsychotic treatment with typical agents
develop parkinsonian signs or symptoms at some point in their course of treatment.
There are no clinical characteristics that distinguish MIP reliably from Parkinson’s disease.
Because motor signs and symptoms in Parkinson’s disease begin unilaterally and progress
asymmetrically, the subacute onset of bilateral parkinsonism within weeks of starting an
antipsychotic or other MIP-causing agent is highly suggestive for MIP. Parkinsonian signs are
often symmetric in MIP, but asymmetric patterns are not uncommon and should not exclude a
diagnosis of MIP. In addition, the course and presentation of parkinsonism should not be better
accounted for by psychiatric phenomena, such as catatonia, negative symptoms of schizophrenia,
or psychomotor retardation in a major depressive episode; other nonparkinsonian medicationinduced movement disorders; another neurological or medical condition (e.g., Parkinson’s
disease, Wilson’s disease); or antipsychotic-exacerbated Parkinson’s disease.
In MIP, rigidity and bradykinesia are more often present, whereas tremor is somewhat less
common and may be absent. Parkinsonian tremor, also referred to as a “pill-rolling tremor,” is a
steady, rhythmic oscillatory movement (3–6 cycles per second) that is apparent at rest and is
typically slower than other tremors. It may be intermittent, unilateral or bilateral, or dependent on
limb position (i.e., positional tremor). The tremor may involve the limbs, head, jaw, mouth, lip
(“rabbit syndrome”), or tongue. As it is present at rest, the tremor can be suppressed, especially




<<<PAGE 1080>>>

These conditions include Huntington’s disease, Wilson’s disease, Sydenham’s (rheumatic)
chorea, systemic lupus erythematosus, thyrotoxicosis, heavy metal poisoning, ill-fitting dentures,
dyskinesia due to other medications such as L-dopa or bromocriptine, and spontaneous
dyskinesias. Factors that may be helpful in making the distinction are evidence that the
symptoms preceded the exposure to the antipsychotic medication or other dopamine receptor
blocking agent or that other focal neurological signs are present. It should be noted that other
movement disorders may coexist with tardive dyskinesia. Because spontaneous dyskinesia can
occur in more than 5% of individuals and is also more common in elderly persons, it may be
difficult to prove that antipsychotic medications produced tardive dyskinesia in a given
individual. Tardive dyskinesia must be distinguished from symptoms that are due to a
medication-induced acute movement disorder (e.g., medication-induced parkinsonism, acute
dystonia, acute akathisia). Acute dystonia and acute akathisia can develop quickly within hours
to days, and medication-induced parkinsonism develops within weeks of initiating or increasing
the dose of an antipsychotic medication or other dopamine receptor blocking agent (or reducing
the dose of a medication used to treat the acute extrapyramidal symptoms). Tardive dyskinesia,
on the other hand, generally develops after more prolonged exposure to antipsychotic medication
(months to years) and can appear after the withdrawal of antipsychotic medication; the minimum
exposure history required for the diagnosis of tardive dyskinesia is antipsychotic medication use
for at least 3 months (or 1 month in middle-age and elderly individuals).

Tardive Dystonia Tardive Akathisia
G24.09 Tardive Dystonia
G25.71 Tardive Akathisia
This category is for tardive syndromes involving other types of movement problems, such as
dystonia or akathisia, which are distinguished by their late emergence in the course of treatment
and their potential persistence for months to years, even in the face of discontinuation of an
antipsychotic medication or other dopamine receptor blocking agent or dosage reduction.
817

Medication-Induced Postural Tremor
G25.1 Medication-Induced Postural Tremor
The essential feature of this condition is a fine tremor occurring during attempts to maintain a
posture, which develops in association with the use of medication. Medications with which such
a tremor may be associated include lithium, β-adrenergic medications (e.g., isoproterenol),
stimulants (e.g., amphetamine), dopaminergic medications, anticonvulsant medications (e.g.,
valproic acid), antidepressant medications, and methylxanthines (e.g., caffeine, theophylline).
The tremor is a regular, rhythmic oscillation of the limbs (most commonly hands and fingers),
head, mouth, or tongue, most commonly with a frequency of between 8 and 12 cycles per
second. It is most easily observed when the affected body part is held in a sustained posture (e.g.,
hands outstretched, mouth held open). The tremor may worsen in severity when the affected




<<<PAGE 1081>>>

body part is moved intentionally (kinetic or action tremor). When an individual describes a
tremor that is consistent with postural tremor but the clinician does not directly observe the
tremor, it may be helpful to try to re-create the situation in which the tremor occurred (e.g.,
drinking from a cup and saucer).
Most available information concerns lithium-induced tremor. Lithium tremor is a common,
usually benign, and well-tolerated side effect of therapeutic doses. However, it may cause social
embarrassment, occupational difficulties, and noncompliance in some individuals. As serum
lithium levels approach toxic levels, the tremor may become coarser and be accompanied by
muscle twitching, fasciculations, or ataxia. Nontoxic lithium tremor may improve spontaneously
over time. A variety of factors may increase the risk of lithium tremor (e.g., increasing age, high
serum lithium levels, concurrent antidepressant or antipsychotic medication or another dopamine
receptor blocking agent, excessive caffeine intake, personal or family history of tremor, presence
of alcohol use disorder, and associated anxiety). The frequency of complaints about tremor
appears to decrease with duration of lithium treatment. Factors that may exacerbate the tremor
include anxiety, stress, fatigue, hypoglycemia, thyrotoxicosis, pheochromocytoma, hypothermia,
and alcohol withdrawal. Tremor can also be an early feature of serotonin syndrome.

Differential Diagnosis
Medication-induced postural tremor should be distinguished from a preexisting tremor that is not
caused by the effects of a medication. Factors that help to establish that the tremor was
preexisting include its temporal relationship to the initiation of medication, lack of correlation
with serum levels of the medication, and persistence after the medication is discontinued. If a
preexisting, nonpharmacologically induced tremor is present (e.g., essential tremor) that worsens
with medication, such a tremor would not be considered to be medication-induced postural
tremor. The factors described above that may contribute to the severity of a medication-induced
postural tremor (e.g., anxiety, stress, fatigue, hypoglycemia, thyrotoxicosis, pheochromocytoma,
hypothermia, alcohol withdrawal) may also be a cause of tremor independent of the medication.
Medication-induced postural tremor is not diagnosed if the tremor is better accounted for by
medication-induced parkinsonism. A medication-induced postural tremor is usually absent at rest
and intensifies when the affected part is brought into action or held in a sustained position. In
contrast, the tremor related to medication-induced parkinsonism is usually lower in frequency
(3–6 Hz), worse at rest, and suppressed during intentional movement and usually occurs in
association with other symptoms of medication-induced parkinsonism (e.g., akinesia, rigidity).
818

Other Medication-Induced Movement Disorder
G25.79 Other Medication-Induced Movement Disorder
This category is for medication-induced movement disorders not captured by any of the specific
disorders listed earlier. Examples include 1) presentations resembling neuroleptic malignant
syndrome that are associated with medications other than antipsychotic medications and other
dopamine receptor blocking agents and 2) other medication-induced tardive conditions.




<<<PAGE 1190>>>

Diagnostic Features
The essential manifestation of suicidal behavior disorder is a suicide attempt. A suicide attempt
is a behavior that the individual has undertaken with at least some intent to die. The behavior
might or might not lead to injury or serious medical consequences. Several factors can influence
the medical consequences of the suicide attempt, including poor planning, lack of knowledge
about the lethality of the method chosen, low intentionality or ambivalence, or chance
intervention by others after the behavior has been initiated. These should not be considered in
assigning the diagnosis.
Determining the degree of intent can be challenging. Individuals might not acknowledge
intent, especially in situations where doing so could result in hospitalization or cause distress to
loved ones. Markers of risk include degree of planning, including selection of a time and place to
minimize rescue or interruption; the individual’s mental state at the time of the behavior, with
acute agitation being especially concerning; recent discharge from inpatient care; or recent
discontinuation of a mood stabilizer such as lithium or an antipsychotic such as clozapine in the
case of schizophrenia. Examples of environmental “triggers” include recently learning of a
potentially fatal medical diagnosis such as cancer, experiencing the sudden and unexpected loss
of a close relative or partner, loss of employment, or displacement from housing. Conversely,
features such as talking to others about future events or preparedness to sign a contract for safety
are less reliable indicators.
In order for the criteria to be met, the individual must have made at least one suicide attempt.
Suicide attempts can include behaviors in which, after initiating the suicide attempt, the
individual changed his or her mind or someone intervened. For example, an individual might
intend to ingest a given amount of medication or poison, but either stop or be stopped by another
before ingesting the full amount. If the individual is dissuaded by another or changes his or her
mind before initiating the behavior, the diagnosis should not be made. The acts qualifying for a
diagnosis of suicidal behavior disorder should not have been initiated exclusively during a state
of delirium or confusion. If the individual deliberately became intoxicated before initiating the
suicidal behavior in order to reduce anticipatory anxiety and to minimize interference with the
intended behavior, the diagnosis can still be made.
Currently there are no clinical instruments that yield positive predictive values sufficient to
make them useful tools for predicting suicidal behavior at the patient level. It is not surprising
that single clinical or biological factors are poor indicators of suicide risk, because suicidal
behavior emerges from a convergence of multiple risk factors. Moreover, given the clinical
heterogeneity of suicidal behavior, it is likely that there are multiple pathways to suicidal
behavior that can only be captured if this heterogeneity is considered. Similarly, numerous
biomarkers have been studied, but no robust predictor has emerged.

Development and Course
Suicidal behavior disorder can occur at any time in the life span but is rarely seen in children
under the age of 5. Approximately 25%–30% of persons who attempt suicide will go on to make
more attempts. There is significant variability in terms of frequency, method, and lethality of
attempts. However, this is not different from what is observed in other illnesses, such as major
depressive disorder, in which frequency of episode, subtype of episode, and impairment for a
given episode can vary significantly.




<<<PAGE 1344>>>

Level of Personality Functioning Scale, 882, 891, 892, 895–898
Lewy bodies. See Dementia with Lewy bodies; Major or mild neurocognitive disorder with Lewy bodies
Life span. See also Mortality rates
coding of phase of life problems, 834
organizational structure of DSM-5 and, 12
variation in sleep across, 408
Lifestyle, coding of problems related to, 833
Light exposure, and circadian rhythm sleepwake disorder, 447
Lisping, and speech sound disorder, 51
Lithium, tremor induced by, 817
Liver function tests, 559
Localized amnesia, 338
Loneliness, and prolonged grief disorder, 324
Long sleepers, and hypersomnolence disorder, 420
LSD (lysergic acid diethylamide), 599

1029
Magical thinking, and psychotic disorders, 115, 907
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and neurocognitive disorders, 698, 704, 708, 710, 716, 720
Major depressive disorder
characteristics of, 177
comorbidity and, 192, 241, 250, 277, 396, 541
culture-related diagnostic issues, 189–190
development and course of, 188–189
diagnostic and associated features of, 185–187
diagnostic criteria for, 183–184
differential diagnosis of, 191–192
adjustment disorders, 321
anorexia nervosa, 386
bipolar disorders, 148, 157
body dysmorphic disorder, 276
bulimia nervosa, 392
depersonalization/derealization disorder, 346
depressive episodes with short-duration hypomania and, 910
disruptive mood dysregulation disorder, 182
dissociative identity disorder, 335
illness anxiety disorder, 360
medication-induced parkinsonism, 810
narcolepsy, 428
neurocognitive disorders, 689, 695, 706
OCD, 270
persistent depressive disorder, 195–196
premenstrual dysphoric disorder, 200
prolonged grief disorder, 327
PTSD and, 312
schizophrenia, 120
sexual dysfunctions, 484, 492, 501
social anxiety disorder, 234
somatic symptom disorder, 356
functional consequences of, 190
insomnia disorder and, 415
kleptomania and, 541
prevalence of, 187–188
risk and prognostic factors, 189
schizoid personality disorder and, 744
sex- and gender-related diagnostic issues, 190
social anxiety disorder and, 235


