<<<PAGE 1069>>>

Medication-Induced Movement Disorders and
Other Adverse Effects of Medication
Medication-induced movement disorders are included in Section II because
of their frequent importance in 1) the management by medication of mental disorders or other
medical conditions and 2) the differential diagnosis of mental disorders (e.g., anxiety disorder vs.
medication-induced akathisia; malignant catatonia [a particularly severe and potentially lifethreatening form of catatonia] vs. neuroleptic malignant syndrome; tardive dyskinesia vs.
chorea). Although these movement disorders are labeled “medication induced,” it is often
difficult to establish the causal relationship between medication exposure and the development of
the movement disorder, especially because some of these movement disorders also occur in the
absence of medication exposure. The conditions and problems listed in this chapter are not
mental disorders.
The term neuroleptic is becoming outdated because it highlights the propensity of
antipsychotic medications to cause abnormal movements, and it is being replaced with the term
antipsychotic medications and other dopamine receptor blocking agents in many contexts.
Although newer antipsychotic medications may be less likely to cause some medication-induced
movement disorders, those disorders still occur. Antipsychotic medications and other dopamine
receptor blocking agents include so-called conventional, “typical,” or first-generation
antipsychotic agents (e.g., chlorpromazine, haloperidol, fluphenazine); “atypical” or secondgeneration antipsychotic agents (e.g., clozapine, risperidone, olanzapine, quetiapine); certain
dopamine receptor blocking drugs used in the treatment of symptoms such as nausea and
gastroparesis (e.g., prochlorperazine, promethazine, trimethobenzamide, thiethylperazine,
metoclopramide); and amoxapine, which is indicated for the treatment of depression.

Medication-Induced Parkinsonism
G21.11 Antipsychotic Medication– and Other Dopamine Receptor
Blocking Agent–Induced Parkinsonism
G21.19 Other Medication-Induced Parkinsonism
Medication-induced parkinsonism (MIP), the second most common cause of parkinsonism after
Parkinson’s disease, is associated with significant morbidity, disability, and treatment
nonadherence, particularly in individuals with psychiatric disorders. Because early recognition is
important, any new case of parkinsonism should prompt a thorough medication history, which is
essential for diagnosis of MIP. A temporal relationship between medication initiation and onset
of parkinsonism should be evident. A host of agents that may be prescribed in individuals with
psychiatric disorders may also induce parkinsonism, but MIP is most often seen upon exposure




<<<PAGE 1070>>>

to antipsychotic medications that block dopamine D2 receptors. MIP occurs at higher rates with
antipsychotics that have higher potency for the dopamine D2 receptor, such as haloperidol,
fluphenazine, and risperidone, but there are no
808
differences in the clinical features of parkinsonism between first- and second-generation
antipsychotics.
Other medications that can cause MIP include calcium channel antagonists (e.g., flunarizine,
cinnarizine), dopamine depleters (e.g., reserpine, tetrabenazine), antiepileptics (e.g., phenytoin,
valproate, levetiracetam), antidepressants (e.g., selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors,
monoamine oxidase inhibitors), lithium, chemotherapeutic drugs (e.g., cystosine arabinoside,
cyclophosphamide, vincristine, doxorubicin, paclitaxel, etoposide), and immunosuppressants
(e.g., cyclosporine, tacrolimus). Toxins (e.g., 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine
[MPTP], organophosphate pesticides, manganese, methanol, cyanide, carbon monoxide, and
carbon disulfide) may also cause MIP.
The time course for development of MIP varies. Usually, MIP develops a few weeks after
starting or raising the dose of a medication known to cause parkinsonism or after reducing an
antiparkinsonian medication (e.g., an anticholinergic agent) that is being used to treat or prevent
medication-induced dystonia or parkinsonian symptoms. However, MIP may also develop
rapidly after starting or raising the dose of a medication or have an insidious onset after many
months of exposure. With antipsychotic medications or other dopamine receptor blocking agents,
MIP typically develops 2–4 weeks after starting the medication and usually by 3 months. Mainly
with calcium channel blockers, a second peak of symptom onset is reported after about 1 year.
Reported rates of MIP are affected by absence of standard diagnostic criteria, incorrect
diagnosis or misattribution of MIP signs to Lewy body disease (e.g., Parkinson’s disease), or a
psychiatric condition, and overall lack of recognition, especially in milder cases. It is estimated
that at least 50% of outpatients receiving long-term antipsychotic treatment with typical agents
develop parkinsonian signs or symptoms at some point in their course of treatment.
There are no clinical characteristics that distinguish MIP reliably from Parkinson’s disease.
Because motor signs and symptoms in Parkinson’s disease begin unilaterally and progress
asymmetrically, the subacute onset of bilateral parkinsonism within weeks of starting an
antipsychotic or other MIP-causing agent is highly suggestive for MIP. Parkinsonian signs are
often symmetric in MIP, but asymmetric patterns are not uncommon and should not exclude a
diagnosis of MIP. In addition, the course and presentation of parkinsonism should not be better
accounted for by psychiatric phenomena, such as catatonia, negative symptoms of schizophrenia,
or psychomotor retardation in a major depressive episode; other nonparkinsonian medicationinduced movement disorders; another neurological or medical condition (e.g., Parkinson’s
disease, Wilson’s disease); or antipsychotic-exacerbated Parkinson’s disease.
In MIP, rigidity and bradykinesia are more often present, whereas tremor is somewhat less
common and may be absent. Parkinsonian tremor, also referred to as a “pill-rolling tremor,” is a
steady, rhythmic oscillatory movement (3–6 cycles per second) that is apparent at rest and is
typically slower than other tremors. It may be intermittent, unilateral or bilateral, or dependent on
limb position (i.e., positional tremor). The tremor may involve the limbs, head, jaw, mouth, lip
(“rabbit syndrome”), or tongue. As it is present at rest, the tremor can be suppressed, especially


