<<<PAGE 665>>>

Sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic substances.

Sedatives,
hypnotics,
and
anxiolytics
(e.g.,
barbiturates, benzodiazepine receptor agonists, meprobamate, glutethimide, methyprylon) have
similar effects as opioids on sleep. During acute intoxication, sedative-hypnotic drugs produce
the expected increase in sleepiness and decrease in wakefulness. Daytime sleepiness may occur,
primarily with longer-acting agents. Chronic benzodiazepine use may be associated with
development of tolerance, rebound insomnia, and potentially serious withdrawal effects. Newer
benzodiazepine receptor agonists such as zolpidem and eszopiclone have been shown to maintain
efficacy over periods of 6 months to 2 years, without evidence of dosage escalation or major
withdrawal effects. Newer hypnotic agents such as ramelteon, low-dose doxepin, and suvorexant
do not appear to have significant abuse potential, respiratory depression, or major withdrawal
syndromes. Sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic drugs with short durations of action are most likely
to produce complaints of rebound insomnia. Some sedative-hypnotic drugs may increase the
frequency and severity of obstructive sleep apnea events, although neither benzodiazepines nor
benzodiazepine receptor agonists have been found to definitively worsen obstructive sleep apnea.
Hypoventilation may worsen in susceptible individuals. Parasomnias (sleepwalking and sleeprelated eating) have been associated with use of benzodiazepine receptor agonists, especially
when these medications are taken at higher doses and when they are combined with other
sedative drugs.
Amphetamine-type substances, other stimulants, and MDMA. Sleep
disorders
induced
by
amphetamine-type substances and other stimulants are characterized by insomnia during
intoxication and excessive sleepiness during withdrawal. During acute intoxication, stimulants
reduce the total amount of sleep, increase sleep latency and sleep continuity disturbances, and
decrease REM sleep. Slow-wave sleep tends to be reduced. During withdrawal from chronic
stimulant use, there is both prolonged nocturnal sleep duration and excessive daytime sleepiness.
Multiple sleep latency tests may show increased daytime sleepiness during the withdrawal phase.
Drugs like 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA; “ecstasy”) and related substances
lead to restless and disturbed sleep within 48 hours of intake; frequent use of these compounds is
associated with persisting symptoms of anxiety, depression, and sleep disturbances, even during
longer-term abstinence. There is also evidence that suggests an increased frequency of
obstructive sleep apnea in young MDMA users, even after a period of abstention from the drug.
Tobacco. Chronic tobacco use is associated primarily with symptoms of insomnia, decreased
slow-wave sleep with a reduction of sleep efficiency, and increased daytime sleepiness.
Withdrawal from tobacco can lead to impaired sleep. Individuals who smoke heavily may
experience regular nocturnal awakenings caused by tobacco craving.
Other or unknown substances/medications. Other substances/medications may produce sleep
disturbances, particularly medications that affect the central or autonomic nervous systems (e.g.,
adrenergic agonists and antagonists, dopamine agonists and antagonists, cholinergic agonists and
antagonists, serotonergic agonists and antagonists, antihistamines, corticosteroids).

Development and Course
Insomnia in children can be identified by either a parent or the child. Often the child has a clear
sleep disturbance associated with initiation of a medication but may not report symptoms,
although parents observe the sleep disturbances. The use of some recreational substances (e.g.,




<<<PAGE 849>>>

F13.21 Moderate, In sustained remission
F13.20 Severe: Presence of 6 or more symptoms.
F13.21 Severe, In early remission
F13.21 Severe, In sustained remission
622

Specifiers
“In a controlled environment” applies as a further specifier of remission if the individual is both
in remission and in a controlled environment (i.e., in early remission in a controlled environment
or in sustained remission in a controlled environment). Examples of these environments are
closely supervised and substance-free jails, therapeutic communities, and locked hospital units.

Diagnostic Features
Sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic substances include benzodiazepines, benzodiazepine-like drugs
(e.g., zolpidem, zaleplon), carbamates (e.g., glutethimide, meprobamate), barbiturates (e.g.,
secobarbital), and barbiturate-like hypnotics (e.g., glutethimide, methaqualone, propofol). This
class of substances includes most prescription sleeping medications and most prescription
antianxiety medications. Nonbenzodiazepine antianxiety agents (e.g., buspirone, gepirone) are
not included in this class because they do not appear to be associated with significant misuse.
Like alcohol, these agents are brain depressants and can produce similar
substance/medication-induced and substance use disorders. Sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic
substances are available both by prescription and illegally. Some individuals who obtain these
substances by prescription will develop a sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder, while
others who misuse these substances or use them for intoxication will not develop a use disorder.
In particular, sedatives, hypnotics, or anxiolytics with rapid onset or short to intermediate lengths
of action may be taken for intoxication purposes, although longer-acting substances in this class
may be taken for intoxication as well.
Craving (Criterion A4), either during periods of active use or during periods of abstinence, is
a typical feature of sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder. Misuse of substances from this
class may occur in conjunction with use of other substances. For example, individuals may use
intoxicating doses of sedatives or benzodiazepines to “come down” from cocaine or
amphetamines or use high doses of benzodiazepines in combination with methadone to “boost”
its effects.
Repeated absences or poor work performance, school absences, suspensions or expulsions,
and neglect of children or household (Criterion A5) may be related to sedative, hypnotic, or
anxiolytic use disorder; the continued use of the substances despite arguments with a spouse
about consequences of intoxication or despite physical fights (Criterion A6) may also occur.
Limiting contact with family or friends, avoiding work or school, or stopping participation in
hobbies, sports, or games (Criterion A7) and recurrent sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use when
driving an automobile or operating machinery when impaired by such use (Criterion A8) are also
seen in sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder.
Very significant levels of tolerance and withdrawal can develop to sedative, hypnotic, or




<<<PAGE 1377>>>

Vocational rehabilitation services, and autism spectrum disorder, 64
Volatile hydrocarbons, 602, 604
Vomiting, and bulimia nervosa, 389, 391
Voyeuristic disorder, 779, 780–783, 788
Vulnerability, cultural features of, 861
Vulvodynia, and genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder, 495
Vulvovaginal atrophy, and female orgasmic disorder, 487
Wandering, associated with mental disorder, 834
Weight gain or loss. See also Body mass index; Obesity
avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder and, 376
body dysmorphic disorder and, 275
medical conditions and, 386
tobacco withdrawal and, 650
Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome, 556
Wernicke’s encephalopathy, 714
WHODAS (WHO Disability Assessment Schedule), 16, 842, 854, 856–857
WHO International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health, 842
Wisconsin Card Sort, 714
Withdrawal, and substance use disorders, 546–547, 548. See also Substance withdrawal; specific substances
Witnessed events, and trauma, 305
Word salad, 102
World Health Assembly (2019), 13
World Health Organization (WHO), 6, 11, 13, 382. See also International Classification of Diseases; WHODAS
World Mental Health Surveys, 237, 308
World Psychiatric Association, 6
Worry
generalized anxiety disorder and, 251, 253
panic attacks and, 237
somatic symptom disorder and, 352
Worster-Drought syndrome, 51
Z codes, 16, 28, 821
and sexual dysfunctions, 478
Zimbabwe, and cultural concepts of distress, 876
Zolpidem, 472

