<<<PAGE 284>>>

Recording Procedures
The name of the substance/medication-induced bipolar and related disorder begins with the
specific substance (e.g., cocaine, dexamethasone) that is presumed to be causing the bipolar
mood symptoms. The diagnostic code is selected from the table included in the criteria set,
which is based on the drug class and presence or absence of a comorbid substance use disorder.
For substances that do not fit into any of the classes (e.g., dexamethasone), the code for “other
(or unknown) substance” should be used; and in cases in which a substance is judged to be an
etiological factor but the specific class of substance is unknown, the same code should also be
used.
When recording the name of the disorder, the comorbid substance use disorder (if any) is
listed first, followed by the word “with,” followed by the name of the substance-induced bipolar
and related disorder, followed by the specification of onset (i.e., onset during intoxication, onset
during withdrawal). For example, in the case of irritable symptoms occurring during intoxication
in a man with a severe cocaine use disorder, the diagnosis is F14.24 severe cocaine use disorder
with cocaine-induced bipolar and related disorder, with onset during intoxication. A separate
diagnosis of the comorbid severe cocaine use disorder is not given. If the substance-induced
bipolar and related disorder occurs without a comorbid substance use disorder (e.g., after a onetime heavy use of the substance), no accompanying substance use disorder is noted (e.g., F15.94
amphetamine-induced bipolar and related disorder, with onset during intoxication). When more
than one substance is judged to play a significant role in the development of bipolar mood
symptoms, each should be listed separately (e.g., F15.24 severe methylphenidate use disorder
with methylphenidate-induced bipolar and related disorder, with onset during intoxication;
F19.94 dexamethasone-induced bipolar and related disorder, with onset during intoxication).
164

Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of substance/medication-induced bipolar and related disorder is a prominent
and persistent disturbance in mood that predominates in the clinical picture and is characterized
by abnormally elevated, expansive, or irritable mood and abnormally increased activity or energy
(Criterion A); these symptoms are judged to be attributable to the effects of a substance (e.g., a
drug of abuse, a medication, or a toxin exposure) (Criterion B).
To meet criteria for the diagnosis, the abnormally elevated, expansive, or irritable mood and
increased activity or energy must have developed during or soon after substance intoxication or
withdrawal or after exposure to or withdrawal from a medication, as evidenced by clinical
history, physical examination, or laboratory findings (Criterion B1), and the involved
substance/medication must be capable of producing the abnormally elevated, expansive, or
irritable mood and increased activity or energy (Criterion B2). In addition, the abnormally
elevated, expansive, or irritable mood and increased activity or energy are not better explained
by a non-substance/medication-induced bipolar and related disorder.
Evidence of an independent bipolar and related disorder includes the observation that the
abnormally elevated, expansive, or irritable mood and increased activity or energy preceded the
onset of substance/medication use, the symptoms persist beyond a substantial period of time after
the cessation of acute withdrawal or severe intoxication (i.e., usually longer than 1 month), or




<<<PAGE 332>>>

medication.

Recording Procedures
The name of the substance/medication-induced depressive disorder begins with the specific
substance (e.g., cocaine, dexamethasone) that is presumed to be causing the depressive
symptoms. The diagnostic code is selected from the table included in the criteria set, which is
based on the drug class and presence or absence of a comorbid substance use disorder. For
substances that do not fit into any of the classes (e.g., dexamethasone), the code for “other (or
unknown) substance” should be used; and in cases in which a substance is judged to be an
etiological factor but the specific class of substance is unknown, the same code should also be
used.
When recording the name of the disorder, the comorbid substance use disorder (if any) is
listed first, followed by the word “with,” followed by the name of the substance-induced
depressive disorder, followed by the specification of onset (i.e., onset during intoxication, onset
during withdrawal). For example, in the case of depressive symptoms occurring during
withdrawal in a man with a severe cocaine use disorder, the diagnosis is F14.24 severe cocaine
use disorder with cocaine-induced depressive disorder, with onset during withdrawal. A separate
diagnosis of the comorbid severe cocaine use disorder is not given. If the substance-induced
depressive disorder occurs without a comorbid substance use disorder (e.g., after a one-time
heavy use of the substance), no accompanying substance use disorder is noted (e.g., F16.94
phencyclidine-induced depressive disorder, with onset during intoxication). When more than one
substance is judged to play a significant role in the development of depressive
203
mood symptoms, each should be listed separately (e.g., F15.24 severe methylphenidate use
disorder with methylphenidate-induced depressive disorder, with onset during withdrawal;
F19.94 dexamethasone-induced depressive disorder, with onset during intoxication).

Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of substance/medication-induced depressive disorder is a prominent and
persistent disturbance in mood that predominates in the clinical picture and is characterized by
depressed mood or markedly diminished interest or pleasure in all, or almost all, activities
(Criterion A) that is due to the direct physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a
medication, or a toxin exposure) (Criterion B). In order to meet criteria for the diagnosis, the
depressive symptoms must have developed during or soon after substance intoxication or
withdrawal or after exposure to or withdrawal from a medication, as evidenced by clinical
history, physical examination, or laboratory findings (Criterion B1), and the involved
substance/medication must be capable of producing the depressive symptoms (Criterion B2). In
addition, the depressed symptoms are not better explained by a non-substance/medicationinduced depressive disorder.
Evidence of an independent depressive disorder includes the observation that the depressive
symptoms preceded the onset of substance/medication use, the depressive symptoms persist
beyond a substantial period of time after the cessation of acute withdrawal or severe intoxication,




<<<PAGE 400>>>

substance and the symptoms develop during intoxication.
With onset during withdrawal: If criteria are met for withdrawal from the
substance and the symptoms develop during, or shortly after, withdrawal.
With onset after medication use: If symptoms developed at initiation of
medication, with a change in use of medication, or during withdrawal of
medication.

Recording Procedures
The name of the substance/medication-induced anxiety disorder begins with the specific
substance (e.g., cocaine, salbutamol) that is presumed to be causing the anxiety symptoms. The
diagnostic code is selected from the table included in the criteria set, which is based on the drug
class and presence or absence of a comorbid substance use disorder. For substances that do not
fit into any of the classes (e.g., salbutamol), the code for “other (or unknown) substance” should
be used; and in cases in which a substance is judged to be an etiological factor but the specific
class of substance is unknown, the same code should also be used.
To record the name of the disorder, the comorbid substance use disorder (if any) is listed
first, followed by “with substance/medication-induced anxiety disorder” (incorporating the name
of the specific etiological substance/medication), followed by the specification of onset (i.e.,
onset during intoxication, onset during withdrawal, with onset after medication use). For
example, in the case of anxiety symptoms occurring during withdrawal in a man with a severe
lorazepam use disorder, the diagnosis is F13.280 severe lorazepam use disorder with lorazepaminduced anxiety disorder, with onset during withdrawal. A separate diagnosis of the comorbid
severe lorazepam use disorder is not given. If the substance-induced anxiety disorder occurs
without a comorbid substance use disorder (e.g., after a one-time
257
heavy use of the substance), no accompanying substance use disorder is noted (e.g., F16.980
psilocybin-induced anxiety disorder, with onset during intoxication). When more than one
substance is judged to play a significant role in the development of anxiety symptoms, each
should be listed separately (e.g., F15.280 severe methylphenidate use disorder with
methylphenidate-induced anxiety disorder, with onset during intoxication; F19.980 salbutamolinduced anxiety disorder, with onset after medication use).

Diagnostic Features
The essential features of substance/medication-induced anxiety disorder are prominent
symptoms of panic or anxiety (Criterion A) that are judged to be due to the effects of a substance
(e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication, or a toxin exposure). The panic or anxiety symptoms must
have developed during or soon after substance intoxication or withdrawal or after exposure to or
withdrawal from a medication, and the substances or medications must be capable of producing
the symptoms (Criterion B2). Substance/medication-induced anxiety disorder due to a prescribed
treatment for a mental disorder or another medical condition must have its onset while the
individual is receiving the medication (or during withdrawal, if a withdrawal is associated with




<<<PAGE 865>>>

Diagnostic Features
Stimulants are a type of psychoactive substance that increases activity in the brain and can
temporarily elevate alertness, mood, and awareness. Stimulants covered in this chapter include
amphetamine and prescription stimulants with similar effects (e.g., methylphenidate) and
cocaine. Substance-related disorders involving certain other substances with stimulant properties
are classified in other sections of this chapter. These include caffeine (in caffeine-related
disorders),
nicotine
(in
tobacco-related
disorders),
and
MDMA
(3,4methylenedioxymethamphetamine; in other hallucinogen-related disorders), which has both
stimulant and hallucinogenic effects.
Given that the effects of amphetamine-type substances are similar to those of cocaine,
amphetamine-related disorders and cocaine-related disorders are grouped under the single rubric
“stimulant-related disorders.” Amphetamine-type substances (and other or unspecified
stimulants) and cocaine have different ICD-10-CM codes (e.g., F15.10 mild amphetamine-type
substance use disorder, F14.10 mild cocaine use disorder). The particular stimulant used by the
individual is recorded in the diagnosis (e.g., “methamphetamine withdrawal,” “methylphenidate
use disorder,” “cocaine intoxication”).
The amphetamine-type substances include stimulants with a substituted phenylethylamine
structure, such as amphetamine, dextroamphetamine, and methamphetamine. Also included are
substances that are structurally different but have similar effects, such as methylphenidate,
modafinil, and armodafinil. These amphetamine-type substances are usually taken orally or
intravenously, although methamphetamine is also taken by the nasal route. In addition to the
synthetic amphetamine-type compounds, there are naturally occurring, plant-derived stimulants
such as khât, as well as synthetic chemical khât analogs, called cathinones.
Amphetamines and other stimulants may be obtained by prescription for the treatment of
obesity, attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, and narcolepsy. Consequently, prescribed
stimulants may be diverted into the illegal market.
Cocaine, a naturally occurring substance produced by the coca plant, is consumed in several
preparations (e.g., coca leaves, coca paste, cocaine hydrochloride, and cocaine alkaloids such as
freebase and crack) that differ in potency because of varying levels of purity and speed of onset.
However, in all of the forms, cocaine is the active ingredient. Cocaine hydrochloride powder is
usually “snorted” through the nostrils or dissolved in water and injected intravenously. Crack and
other cocaine alkaloids are easily vaporized and inhaled, and thus their effects have an extremely
rapid onset.
Individuals exposed to amphetamine-type substances or cocaine can develop stimulant use
disorder as rapidly as 1 week, although the onset is not always this rapid. Regardless of the route
of administration, tolerance occurs with repeated use. Withdrawal symptoms, particularly
hypersomnia, increased appetite, and dysphoria, can occur and can enhance craving. Most
individuals with stimulant use disorder have experienced tolerance or withdrawal.
Use patterns and course are similar for disorders involving amphetamine-type substances and
cocaine, as both are potent central nervous system stimulants with similar psychoactive and
sympathomimetic effects. Amphetamine-type substances are longer acting than cocaine and thus
are used fewer times per day. Usage may be chronic or episodic, with binges punctuated by brief
non-use periods. Aggressive or violent behavior is common when high doses are smoked,
ingested, or administered intravenously. Intense temporary anxiety resembling panic disorder or




<<<PAGE 867>>>

Indians/Alaskan Natives.
Among U.S. adults, 6.6% (annual average) used prescription stimulants overall; 4.5% used
without misuse, 1.9% misused without use disorders, and 0.2% had use disorders. While nonHispanic Whites are more likely to use prescription stimulants nonmedically, Hispanics tend to
use them more frequently and have higher rates of prescription stimulant use disorder.
Stimulant use disorder: cocaine. Estimated 12-month prevalence of cocaine use disorder in the
United States is 0.4% among individuals 12 years and older. Rates are 0.1% among individuals
ages 12–17 years, 0.7% among those ages 18–25 years, and 0.3% among those age 26 and older.
Rates are 0.5% for men and 0.2% for women, overall. Rates are 0.4% among African Americans
and non-Hispanic Whites, 0.3% in Hispanics, and < 0.1% among Asian Americans.
637

Development and Course
In the United States, stimulant use disorder occurs throughout all levels of society and is more
common among individuals ages 18–25 years compared with individuals ages 12–17 or 26 years
and older. On average, first regular use among individuals in treatment occurs at approximately
age 23 years. For primary methamphetamine treatment admissions, the average age is 34 years,
and for primary cocaine treatment admissions, the average age is 44 years for smoked cocaine
and 37 years for other routes.
Some persons begin stimulant use to control weight or to improve performance in school,
work, or athletics. Initial use may include obtaining medications such as methylphenidate or
amphetamine salts prescribed to others for the treatment of attention-deficit/hyperactivity
disorder. Among primary treatment admissions for amphetamine-type substance use in the
United States, 61% reported smoking, 26% reported injecting, and 9% reported snorting,
suggesting that stimulant use disorder can develop from multiple modes of administration.
Patterns of stimulant administration include episodic or daily (or almost daily) use. Episodic
use (e.g., intense use over a weekend or on one or more weekdays) tends to be separated by 2 or
more days of nonuse. “Binges” involve continuous high-dose use over hours or days and are
often associated with physical dependence. Binges usually terminate only when stimulant
supplies are depleted or exhaustion ensues. Chronic daily use may involve high or low doses,
often with an increase in dose over time.
Stimulant smoking and intravenous use are associated with rapid progression to severe-level
stimulant use disorder, often occurring over weeks to months. Intranasal use of cocaine and oral
use of amphetamine-type substances result in more gradual progression occurring over months to
years. With continued use, there is a diminution of pleasurable effects because of tolerance and
an increase in dysphoric effects.

Risk and Prognostic Factors
Temperamental.

Comorbid bipolar disorder, schizophrenia, antisocial personality disorder, and
other substance use disorders are risk factors for developing stimulant use disorder and for
relapse to cocaine use in treatment samples. Higher stress reactivity has been correlated with
frequency of cocaine use in some U.S. treatment samples. Conduct disorder in childhood and
antisocial personality disorder are associated with the development of stimulant-related




<<<PAGE 1075>>>

contractions (increased muscle tone) and postures that develop in association with use of a
medication known to cause acute dystonia. Any medication that blocks dopamine D2-like
receptors can induce an acute dystonic reaction (ADR). Most commonly, ADRs occur after
exposure to antipsychotics and antiemetic and promotility agents. A variety of other medication
classes are also reported to have induced ADRs, including selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitors, cholinesterase inhibitors, opioids, and methylphenidate.
Dystonic reactions vary greatly in severity and location and can be focal, segmented, or
generalized. They most often affect head and neck muscles, but can extend to upper and lower
limbs or trunk. A common presentation is acute oro-mandibular (jaw) dystonia involving the
tongue and mouth with tongue protrusion, or gaping or grimacing postures that can impair
speech (dysarthria) and swallowing (dysphagia) and may evolve into frank trismus (lockjaw).
Involvement of ocular muscles (oculogyric crisis) manifests as involuntary forced and sustained
conjugate deviations of eyes upward, downward, or sideways that can last minutes to hours.
Blepharospasm can also occur. Cervical (neck) dystonia presents as abnormal forward,
backward, lateral, or twisting positions of the head and neck in relation to the body (e.g.,
antecollis, retrocollis, laterocollis, and torticollis). Focal limb dystonia, generally more distal
than proximal, Pisa syndrome (lateral bending of the trunk with a tendency to lean to one side),
and back arching that may evolve into opisthotonos (backward arching of head, neck, and spine)
can also occur. Acute laryngeal dystonia is life-threatening, causing airway obstruction, and
manifests as a “clutching of the throat,” stridor, dysphonia, dysphagia, dyspnea, and respiratory
distress from the medication effects on vocal cords and laryngeal muscles.
At least 50% of individuals develop ADR signs or symptoms within 24–48 hours of starting
or rapidly raising the dose of antipsychotic medication or other dopamine receptor blocking
agent or of reducing a medication being used to treat or prevent acute extrapyramidal symptoms
(e.g., anticholinergic agents). Approximately 90% of affected individuals have onset of ADRs
within 5 days. The symptoms must not be better accounted for by a mental disorder (e.g.,
catatonia) and must not be due to a primary neurological or other medical condition, or a tardive
medication-induced movement disorder.
Fear and anxiety often accompany ADRs given their intense nature, inability of the
individual to control or stop the movements, and, when present, difficulty breathing, speaking, or
swallowing. Some individuals experience pain or cramps in affected muscles. Individuals who
are unaware of the possibility of developing a medication-induced dystonia can be especially
distressed, increasing the likelihood of subsequent medication nonadherence. Thought disorder,
delusions, or mannerisms in an individual with psychosis may cause the affected individual or
others to mistakenly regard his or her dystonic symptoms as a feature of the psychiatric
condition, which could lead to increased doses of the causative medication. The risk of
developing ADRs is greatest in children and in adults younger than age 40 with psychosis, with a
greater incidence in males than females in both children and adults. Other risk factors for
developing ADRs include prior dystonic reactions to antipsychotic medications or other
dopamine receptor blocking agents and use of high-potency typical antipsychotic medications.

Differential Diagnosis
It is important to distinguish between medication-induced ADRs and other causes of dystonia,
especially in individuals being treated with antipsychotic or other dopamine receptor blocking




<<<PAGE 1115>>>

13. Feeling that someone could hear
your thoughts, or that you
could hear what another
person was thinking?

0

1

2

3

4

VIII.

14. Problems with sleep that
affected your sleep quality
overall?

0

1

2

3

4

IX.

15. Problems with memory (e.g.,
learning new information) or
with location (e.g., finding
your way home)?

0

1

2

3

4

X.

16. Unpleasant thoughts, urges, or
images that repeatedly enter
your mind?

0

1

2

3

4

17. Feeling driven to perform
certain behaviors or mental
acts over and over again?

0

1

2

3

4

XI.

18. Feeling detached or distant from
yourself, your body, your
physical surroundings, or
your memories?

0

1

2

3

4

XII.

19. Not knowing who you really are
or what you want out of life?

0

1

2

3

4

20. Not feeling close to other
people or enjoying your
relationships with them?

0

1

2

3

4

21. Drink at least 4 drinks of any
kind of alcohol in a single
day?

0

1

2

3

4

22. Smoke any cigarettes, a cigar,
or pipe, or use snuff or
chewing tobacco?

0

1

2

3

4

23. Use any of the following
medicines ON YOUR OWN,
that is, without a doctor’s
prescription, in greater
amounts or longer than
prescribed [e.g., painkillers
(like Vicodin), stimulants
(like Ritalin or Adderall),
sedatives or tranquilizers
(like sleeping pills or
Valium), or drugs like
marijuana, cocaine or crack,
club drugs (like ecstasy),
hallucinogens (like LSD),
heroin, inhalants or solvents
(like glue), or
methamphetamine (like
speed)]?

0

1

2

3

4

XIII.

849

Parent/Guardian-Rated DSM-5 Level 1 Cross-Cutting Symptom
Measure—Child Age 6–17




<<<PAGE 1117>>>

—that is, saw something or
someone that no one else could
see?
X.

16. Said that he/she had thoughts that
kept coming into his/her mind
that he/she would do something
bad or that something bad
would happen to him/her or to
someone else?

0

1

2

3

4

17. Said he/she felt the need to check
on certain things over and over
again, like whether a door was
locked or whether the stove
was turned off?

0

1

2

3

4

18. Seemed to worry a lot about
things he/she touched being
dirty or having germs or being
poisoned?

0

1

2

3

4

1

2

3

4

19. Said that he/she had to do things
0
in a certain way, like counting
or saying special things out
loud, in order to keep
something bad from
happening?
In the past TWO (2) WEEKS, has your child …
XI.

XII.

20. Had an alcoholic beverage (beer,
wine, liquor, etc.)?

❑ Yes

❑ No

❑ Don’t Know

21. Smoked a cigarette, a cigar, or
pipe, or used snuff or chewing
tobacco?

❑ Yes

❑ No

❑ Don’t Know

22. Used drugs like marijuana,
cocaine or crack, club drugs
(like ecstasy), hallucinogens
(like LSD), heroin, inhalants or
solvents (like glue), or
methamphetamine (like speed)?

❑ Yes

❑ No

❑ Don’t Know

23. Used any medicine without a
doctor’s prescription (e.g.,
painkillers [like Vicodin],
stimulants [like Ritalin or
Adderall], sedatives or
tranquilizers [like sleeping pills
or Valium], or steroids)?

❑ Yes

❑ No

❑ Don’t Know

24. In the past TWO (2) WEEKS,
has he/she talked about wanting
to kill himself/herself or about
wanting to commit suicide?

❑ Yes

❑ No

❑ Don’t Know

25. Has he/she EVER tried to kill
himself/herself?

❑ Yes

❑ No

❑ Don’t Know

851

Clinician-Rated Dimensions of Psychosis Symptom Severity
As described in the chapter “Schizophrenia Spectrum and Other Psychotic Disorders,” psychotic
disorders are heterogeneous, and symptom severity can predict important aspects of the illness,




<<<PAGE 1348>>>

Meditation, and depersonalization/derealization, 345
Melancholic features, as specifier, 171–172, 211–212
Memory. See also Cognitive deficits
dissociative amnesia and, 329, 338, 339, 342–343
major depressive disorder and, 186
neurocognitive disorders and, 670, 685
PTSD and loss of, 307
sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic intoxication and, 627
traumatic brain injury and, 313
Menopause
genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder and, 497
insomnia disorder and, 413
obstructive sleep apnea and, 432
schizophrenia and, 119
Mental disorder(s). See also specific disorders definition of, 13–14, 29
regrouping of in revision of DSM-5, 11–12
Mental disorder due to another medical condition, 366
Metabolic disorders, 132, 391
Methadone, and methadone maintenance therapy, 436, 508, 612
Methamphetamine (MDMA), 472, 508, 592, 594, 597, 635, 642, 714–715
Methamphetamine use disorder, 547, 550
Methylphenidate, and substance/medication-induced anxiety disorder, 257
Mexican Americans. See also Hispanic Americans; Latinx
binge-eating disorder in, 394
vascular dementia in, 705
Mexico, and religious or spiritual use of hallucinogens, 593
Meyer, Adolf, 5
Microaggressions, and racism, 17
Mild neurocognitive disorder. See Major or mild neurocognitive disorders; Neurocognitive disorders
Military deployment, and codes, 830–831. See also Veterans
Mineral deficiencies, and pica, 372. See also Iron deficiency
Minoritization. See Discrimination; Ethnicity; Oppression
Misdiagnosis. See also Overdiagnosis; Underdiagnosis
of ADHD as bipolar II disorder, 158
of antisocial personality disorder, 751
of autism spectrum disorder, 63, 65
of bipolar disorders, 148, 150, 335
of conduct disorder, 535
cultural concepts of distress and, 873
of intermittent explosive disorder, 528
of major depressive disorder, 190
of oppositional defiant disorder, 525
of schizophrenia, 18, 116, 119, 147
Mistrust. See also Distrust
Cultural Formulation Interview and, 863
paranoid personality disorder and, 740
Mixed features, as specifier, 170–171, 211
Monoamine oxidase inhibitors, and substance/medication-induced sexual dysfunction, 507
Mood. See also Mood disorders
bipolar disorders compared to disruptive mood dysregulation disorder, 181
bulimia nervosa and, 392
Clinician-Rated Dimensions of Psychosis Symptom Severity scale, 851
insomnia disorder and, 412
manic episodes and, 143–144
neurocognitive disorders and, 684
PTSD and negative alterations in, 306–307, 311

1032


