<<<PAGE 834>>>

medication (except tolerance to, or withdrawal from, the agonist). This category
also applies to those individuals being maintained on a partial agonist, an
agonist/antagonist, or a full antagonist such as oral naltrexone or depot
naltrexone.
In a controlled environment: This additional specifier is used if the individual is
in an environment where access to opioids is restricted.
Code based on current severity/remission: If an opioid intoxication, opioid
withdrawal, or another opioid-induced mental disorder is also present, do not use the
codes below for opioid use disorder. Instead, the comorbid opioid use disorder is
indicated in the 4th character of the opioid-induced disorder code (see the coding
note for opioid intoxication, opioid withdrawal, or a specific opioid-induced mental
disorder). For example, if there is comorbid opioid-induced depressive disorder and
opioid use disorder, only the opioid-induced depressive disorder code is given, with
the 4th character indicating whether the comorbid opioid use disorder is mild,
moderate, or severe: F11.14 for mild opioid use disorder with opioid-induced
depressive disorder or F11.24 for a moderate or severe opioid use disorder with
opioid-induced depressive disorder.
Specify current severity/remission:
F11.10 Mild: Presence of 2–3 symptoms.
F11.11 Mild, In early remission
F11.11 Mild, In sustained remission
610
F11.20 Moderate: Presence of 4–5 symptoms.
F11.21 Moderate, In early remission
F11.21 Moderate, In sustained remission
F11.20 Severe: Presence of 6 or more symptoms.
F11.21 Severe, In early remission
F11.21 Severe, In sustained remission

Specifiers
The “on maintenance therapy” specifier applies as a further specifier of remission if the
individual is both in remission and receiving maintenance therapy. “In a controlled environment”
applies as a further specifier of remission if the individual is both in remission and in a controlled
environment (i.e., in early remission in a controlled environment or in sustained remission in a
controlled environment). Examples of these environments are closely supervised and substancefree jails, therapeutic communities, and locked hospital units.
Changing severity across time in an individual is also reflected by reductions in the
frequency (e.g., days of use per month) and/or dose (e.g., injections or number of pills) of an
opioid, as assessed by the individual’s self-report, report of knowledgeable others, clinician’s




<<<PAGE 844>>>

opioid use disorder. If a mild opioid use disorder is comorbid, the ICD-10-CM code is
F11.13, and if a moderate or severe opioid use disorder is comorbid, the ICD-10-CM
code is F11.23. For opioid withdrawal occurring in the absence of an opioid use
disorder (e.g., in a patient taking opioids solely under appropriate medical
supervision), the ICD-10-CM code is F11.93.

Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of opioid withdrawal is the presence of a characteristic withdrawal
syndrome that develops after the cessation of (or reduction in) prolonged opioid use
618
(Criterion A1). The opioids used may be illicit or licitly obtained drugs prescribed to treat pain.
A withdrawal syndrome can also be precipitated by administration of an opioid antagonist (e.g.,
naloxone, naltrexone, nalmefene) after a period of opioid use (Criterion A2); it can also occur
after administration of an opioid partial agonist (e.g., buprenorphine) to an individual currently
using a full opioid agonist.
Opioid withdrawal has a characteristic pattern of signs and symptoms. The first of these are
subjective and consist of complaints of anxiety, restlessness, and an “achy feeling” that is often
located in the back and legs, along with irritability and increased sensitivity to pain. Three or
more of the following must be present to make a diagnosis of opioid withdrawal: dysphoric
mood; nausea or vomiting; muscle aches; lacrimation or rhinorrhea; pupillary dilation,
piloerection, or increased sweating; diarrhea; yawning; fever; and insomnia (Criterion B).
Piloerection and fever are associated with more severe withdrawal and are not often seen in
routine clinical practice because individuals with opioid use disorder usually obtain substances
before withdrawal becomes that far advanced. These symptoms of opioid withdrawal must cause
clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of
functioning (Criterion C). The symptoms must not be attributable to another medical condition
and are not better explained by another mental disorder (Criterion D). Having symptoms that
meet diagnostic criteria for opioid withdrawal alone is not sufficient for a diagnosis of opioid use
disorder, but concurrent symptoms of craving and drug-seeking behavior are suggestive of
comorbid opioid use disorder.

Associated Features
Opioid withdrawal may occur in any individual after cessation of repeated use of an opioid,
whether in the setting of medical management of pain, during opioid agonist therapy for opioid
use disorder, in the context of illicit use, or following attempts to self-treat symptoms of mental
disorders with opioids. Opioid withdrawal is a distinct condition from opioid addiction or opioid
use disorder and does not necessarily require the drug-seeking behaviors associated with opioid
use disorder to be diagnosed. Thus, opioid withdrawal may occur in individuals without opioid
use disorder and should not be confused with it. Males with opioid withdrawal may experience
piloerection, sweating, and spontaneous ejaculations while awake.

Prevalence


