<<<PAGE 709>>>

substance/medication-induced sexual dysfunction typically concern the effects of antidepressant
drugs. The prevalence of antidepressant-induced sexual dysfunction varies in part depending on
the specific agent. Approximately 25%–80% of individuals taking monoamine oxidase
inhibitors, tricyclic antidepressants, serotonergic antidepressants, and combined serotonergicadrenergic antidepressants report sexual side effects. There
508
are differences in the incidence of sexual side effects between some serotonergic and combined
adrenergic-serotonergic antidepressants, with medications such as citalopram, fluoxetine,
fluvoxamine, paroxetine, sertraline, and venlafaxine having the highest rates of sexual
dysfunction.
Approximately 50% of individuals taking antipsychotic medications will experience adverse
sexual side effects, including problems with sexual desire, erection, lubrication, ejaculation, or
orgasm. The incidence of these side effects among different antipsychotic agents is unclear.
Exact prevalence and incidence of sexual dysfunctions among users of nonpsychiatric
medications such as cardiovascular, cytotoxic, gastrointestinal, and hormonal agents are
unknown. Elevated rates of sexual dysfunction have been reported high-dose opioid drugs for
pain. There are increased rates of decreased sexual desire, erectile dysfunction, and difficulty
reaching orgasm associated with illicit substance use. The prevalence of sexual problems appears
related to chronic drug abuse and appears higher in individuals who abuse heroin (approximately
60%–70%) than in individuals who abuse amphetamine-type substances or 3,4methylenedioxymethamphetamine (i.e., MDMA, ecstasy). Elevated rates of sexual dysfunction
are also seen in individuals receiving methadone but are seldom reported by individuals
receiving buprenorphine. Chronic alcohol abuse and chronic nicotine abuse are related to higher
rates of erectile problems.

Development and Course
The onset of antidepressant-induced sexual dysfunction may be as early as 8 days after the agent
is first taken. Approximately 30% of individuals with mild to moderate orgasm delay will
experience spontaneous remission of the dysfunction within 6 months. In some cases, serotonin
reuptake inhibitor–induced sexual dysfunction may persist after the agent is discontinued. The
time to onset of sexual dysfunction after initiation of antipsychotic drugs or drugs of abuse is
unknown. It is probable that the adverse effects of nicotine and alcohol may not appear until after
years of use. Premature (early) ejaculation can sometimes occur after cessation of opioid use.
There is some evidence that disturbances in sexual function related to substance/medication use
increase with age.

Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
There may be an interaction among cultural factors, the influence of medications on sexual
functioning, and the response of the individual to those changes.

Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Some gender differences in sexual side effects from substances and medications may exist, such




<<<PAGE 895>>>

Differential Diagnosis
Dose reduction after extended dosing, but not meeting the criteria for other (or unknown)
substance withdrawal.

The individual used other (or unknown) substances, but the dose that was used was insufficient
to produce symptoms that meet the criteria required for the withdrawal diagnosis.
Substance withdrawal or other substance/medication-induced mental disorders. Familiar
substances
may be sold in the black market as novel products, and individuals may experience withdrawal
when discontinuing those substances. History, toxicology screens, or
660
chemical testing of the substance itself may help to identify it. Other substance withdrawal is
distinguished from other substance/medication-induced mental disorders (e.g., venlafaxineinduced anxiety disorder, with onset during withdrawal) because the symptoms (e.g., anxiety) in
these latter disorders are in excess of symptoms (if known) usually associated with the specific
substance withdrawal, predominate in the clinical presentation, and are severe enough to warrant
clinical attention.
Other toxic, metabolic, traumatic, neoplastic, vascular, or infectious disorders that impair brain
function and cognition.

Numerous neurological and other medical conditions may produce rapid onset of signs and
symptoms mimicking those of withdrawals. Paradoxically, drug intoxications also must be ruled
out; for example, lethargy may indicate withdrawal from one drug or intoxication with another
substance.

Comorbidity
As with all substance-related disorders, conduct disorder in adolescence, antisocial personality
disorder, and other substance use disorders are likely to co-occur with other (or unknown)
substance withdrawal.

Other (or Unknown) Substance–Induced Mental
Disorders
Because the category of other or unknown substances is inherently ill-defined, the extent and
range of these substance-induced mental disorders are uncertain. Nevertheless, other (or
unknown) substance–induced mental disorders are possible and are described in other chapters of
the manual with disorders with which they share phenomenology (see the substance/medicationinduced mental disorders in these chapters): other (or unknown) substance–induced psychotic
disorder (“Schizophrenia Spectrum and Other Psychotic Disorders”); other (or unknown)
substance–induced bipolar and related disorder (“Bipolar and Related Disorders”); other (or
unknown) substance–induced depressive disorder (“Depressive Disorders”); other (or unknown)
substance–induced anxiety disorders (“Anxiety Disorders”); other (or unknown) substance–
induced obsessive-compulsive disorder (“Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorders”); other
(or unknown) substance–induced sleep disorder (“Sleep-Wake Disorders”); other (or unknown)
substance–induced sexual dysfunction (“Sexual Dysfunctions”); and other (or unknown)




<<<PAGE 1082>>>

Antidepressant Discontinuation Syndrome
T43.205A Initial encounter
T43.205D Subsequent encounter
T43.205S Sequelae
Discontinuation symptoms may occur following treatment with all types of antidepressants. The
incidence of this syndrome depends on the dosage and half-life of the medication being taken, as
well as the rate at which the medication is tapered. Short half-life medications that are abruptly
discontinued (or when the dose is significantly reduced) rather than tapered gradually may pose
the greatest risk. The short-acting antidepressants paroxetine and venlafaxine are the agents most
commonly associated with discontinuation symptoms. Antidepressant discontinuation syndrome
may occur in the context of intermittent non-adherence to treatment and therefore may be
irregularly present in some individuals who have not actually stopped taking the medication.
This is especially true for very short half-life medications (e.g., venlafaxine). By contrast, long
half-life medications like fluoxetine seldom produce significant discontinuation effects.
Unlike withdrawal syndromes associated with opioids, alcohol, and other substances,
antidepressant discontinuation syndrome has no pathognomonic symptoms. Instead, the
symptoms tend to be vague and variable. Symptoms typically begin 2–4 days after the last dose
of the antidepressant. For selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, symptoms such as dizziness,
tinnitus, “electric shock”–like sensations, insomnia, and acute anxiety are described. The
antidepressant use before discontinuation must not have incurred hypomania or mixed state (i.e.,
there should be confidence that the discontinuation syndrome is not the result of fluctuations in
mood stability associated with the previous treatment). For the tricyclic antidepressants, sudden
discontinuation has been associated with gastrointestinal symptoms (cramping—reflecting
cholinergic overactivity after stopping an anticholinergic tricyclic antidepressant) as well as
rebound hypomania.
The antidepressant discontinuation syndrome is based solely on pharmacological factors and
is not related to the reinforcing effects of an antidepressant. Unlike the discontinuation of
substances with reinforcing effects like opioids, drug craving does not occur. Also, when a
stimulant is used to augment an antidepressant, abrupt cessation may result in stimulant
withdrawal symptoms (see “Stimulant Withdrawal” in the chapter “Substance-Related and
Addictive Disorders”) rather than the antidepressant discontinuation syndrome described here.
The prevalence of antidepressant discontinuation syndrome is unknown but is thought to vary
according to any of the following factors: the dosage before discontinuation, the half-life (i.e.,
occurring more commonly with short half-life medications) and receptor-binding affinity of the
medication (e.g., more likely to occur with serotonin reuptake inhibitors), and possibly the
individual’s genetically influenced rate of metabolism for this
819
medication. Therefore, discontinuation reactions occur more frequently with short half-life
medications, but may also be influenced by rapid or ultrarapid metabolizer status of cytochrome
enzymes that metabolize the antidepressant.




<<<PAGE 1376>>>

Unspecified intellectual developmental disorder (intellectual disability), 46
Unspecified mental disorder due to another medical condition, 803, 804, 805
Unspecified mood disorder, 169, 210
Unspecified neurocognitive disorder, 683, 732
Unspecified neurodevelopmental disorder, 99
Unspecified obsessive-compulsive and related disorder, 293, 294
Unspecified opioid-related disorder, 619
Unspecified other (or unknown) substancerelated disorder, 660–661
Unspecified paraphilic disorder, 801
Unspecified personality disorder, 733–734, 778
Unspecified phencyclidine-related disorder, 600
Unspecified schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorder, 138
Unspecified sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolyticrelated disorder, 632
Unspecified sexual dysfunction, 509
Unspecified sleep-wake disorder, 476
Unspecified somatic symptom and related disorder, 370
Unspecified stimulant-related disorder, 644
Unspecified tic disorder, 93, 98
Unspecified tobacco-related disorder, 651
Unspecified trauma- and stressor-related disorder, 328
Urinary incontinence, 399, 400, 493
Vaginismus, and genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder, 494–495
Vaping, and cannabis use disorder, 577
Vata, 876
Venlafaxine, 818
Verbal dyspraxia, 50
Veterans. See also Military deployment
cannabis use disorder and, 580
major or mild neurocognitive disorder due to traumatic brain injury in, 711
opioid use disorder in, 612, 613
prevalence of PTSD in, 308
Veterans Health Administration (VHA), 580, 613, 649
Victimization, and gender dysphoria, 519
Video monitoring, of rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder, 463
Vietnam, panic disorder in, 239, 244
Violence. See also Criminal behavior; Domestic violence
alcohol-related disorders and, 560, 562
conduct disorder and, 533, 534
content of obsessions and compulsions, 268
neurobehavioral disorder associated with prenatal alcohol exposure and, 920
opioid use disorder and, 612
phencyclidine use disorder and, 589
prolonged grief disorder and, 326
PTSD and, 305, 311
sleepwalking and, 454
stimulant use disorder and, 635
Visual Analogue Scales for Premenstrual Mood Symptoms, 199
Visual processing abnormalities, and body dysmorphic disorder, 273
Visual symptoms. See also Hallucinations
of depersonalization/derealization disorder, 34
of functional neurological symptom disorder, 362
hallucinogen persisting perception disorder and, 598–599
Vitamin deficiencies, and pica, 372

1050
Vocabulary, and language disorder, 47–48
Vocal tics, 94


