<<<PAGE 400>>>

substance and the symptoms develop during intoxication.
With onset during withdrawal: If criteria are met for withdrawal from the
substance and the symptoms develop during, or shortly after, withdrawal.
With onset after medication use: If symptoms developed at initiation of
medication, with a change in use of medication, or during withdrawal of
medication.

Recording Procedures
The name of the substance/medication-induced anxiety disorder begins with the specific
substance (e.g., cocaine, salbutamol) that is presumed to be causing the anxiety symptoms. The
diagnostic code is selected from the table included in the criteria set, which is based on the drug
class and presence or absence of a comorbid substance use disorder. For substances that do not
fit into any of the classes (e.g., salbutamol), the code for “other (or unknown) substance” should
be used; and in cases in which a substance is judged to be an etiological factor but the specific
class of substance is unknown, the same code should also be used.
To record the name of the disorder, the comorbid substance use disorder (if any) is listed
first, followed by “with substance/medication-induced anxiety disorder” (incorporating the name
of the specific etiological substance/medication), followed by the specification of onset (i.e.,
onset during intoxication, onset during withdrawal, with onset after medication use). For
example, in the case of anxiety symptoms occurring during withdrawal in a man with a severe
lorazepam use disorder, the diagnosis is F13.280 severe lorazepam use disorder with lorazepaminduced anxiety disorder, with onset during withdrawal. A separate diagnosis of the comorbid
severe lorazepam use disorder is not given. If the substance-induced anxiety disorder occurs
without a comorbid substance use disorder (e.g., after a one-time
257
heavy use of the substance), no accompanying substance use disorder is noted (e.g., F16.980
psilocybin-induced anxiety disorder, with onset during intoxication). When more than one
substance is judged to play a significant role in the development of anxiety symptoms, each
should be listed separately (e.g., F15.280 severe methylphenidate use disorder with
methylphenidate-induced anxiety disorder, with onset during intoxication; F19.980 salbutamolinduced anxiety disorder, with onset after medication use).

Diagnostic Features
The essential features of substance/medication-induced anxiety disorder are prominent
symptoms of panic or anxiety (Criterion A) that are judged to be due to the effects of a substance
(e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication, or a toxin exposure). The panic or anxiety symptoms must
have developed during or soon after substance intoxication or withdrawal or after exposure to or
withdrawal from a medication, and the substances or medications must be capable of producing
the symptoms (Criterion B2). Substance/medication-induced anxiety disorder due to a prescribed
treatment for a mental disorder or another medical condition must have its onset while the
individual is receiving the medication (or during withdrawal, if a withdrawal is associated with




<<<PAGE 662>>>

excessive sleepiness/fatigue during waking hours or, less commonly, a long
sleep period.
Parasomnia type: Characterized by abnormal behavioral events during sleep.
Mixed type: Characterized by a substance/medication-induced sleep problem
characterized by multiple types of sleep symptoms, but no symptom clearly
predominates.
Specify (see Table 1 in the chapter “Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders,”
which indicates whether “with onset during intoxication” and/or “with onset during
withdrawal” applies to a given substance class; or specify “with onset after
medication use”):
With onset during intoxication: If criteria are met for intoxication with the
substance and the symptoms develop during the intoxication.
With onset during withdrawal: If criteria are met for withdrawal from the
substance and the symptoms develop during, or shortly after, withdrawal.
With onset after medication use: If symptoms developed at initiation of
medication, with a change in use of medication, or during withdrawal of
medication.

Recording Procedures
The name of the substance/medication-induced sleep disorder begins with the specific substance
(e.g., alcohol) that is presumed to be causing the sleep disturbance. The ICD-10-CM code that
corresponds to the applicable drug class is selected from the table included in the criteria set. For
substances that do not fit into any of the classes (e.g., fluoxetine), the ICD-10-CM code for the
other (or unknown) substance class should be used and the name
470
of the specific substance recorded (e.g., F19.982 fluoxetine-induced sleep disorder, insomnia
type). In cases in which a substance is judged to be an etiological factor but the specific
substance is unknown, the ICD-10-CM code for the other (or unknown) substance class is used
and the fact that the substance is unknown is recorded (e.g., F19.982 unknown substanceinduced sleep disorder, hypersomnia type).
To record the name of the disorder, the comorbid substance use disorder (if any) is listed
first, followed by “with substance/medication-induced sleep disorder” (incorporating the name of
the specific etiological substance/medication), followed by the specification of onset (i.e., with
onset during intoxication, with onset during withdrawal, with onset after medication use),
followed by the subtype designation (i.e., insomnia type, daytime sleepiness type, parasomnia
type, mixed type). For example, in the case of insomnia occurring during withdrawal in a man
with a severe lorazepam use disorder, the diagnosis is F13.282 severe lorazepam use disorder
with lorazepam-induced sleep disorder, with onset during withdrawal, insomnia type. A separate
diagnosis of the comorbid severe lorazepam use disorder is not given. If the substance-induced
sleep disorder occurs without a comorbid substance use disorder (e.g., with medication use as




<<<PAGE 859>>>

Associated Features
The timing and severity of the withdrawal syndrome will differ depending on the specific
substance and its pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics. For example, withdrawal from
shorter-acting substances that are rapidly absorbed and that have no active metabolites (e.g.,
triazolam) can begin within hours after the substance is stopped; withdrawal from substances
with long-acting metabolites (e.g., diazepam) may not begin for 1–2 days or longer. The
withdrawal syndrome produced by substances in this class may be characterized by the
development of a delirium that can be life-threatening. There may be evidence of tolerance and
withdrawal in the absence of a diagnosis of a benzodiazepine use disorder in an individual who
has abruptly discontinued benzodiazepines that were taken for long periods of time at prescribed
and therapeutic doses.
The time course of the withdrawal syndrome is generally predicted by the half-life of the
substance. Medications whose actions typically last about 10 hours or less (e.g., lorazepam,
oxazepam, temazepam) produce withdrawal symptoms within 6–8 hours of decreasing blood
levels that peak in intensity on the second day and improve markedly by the fourth or fifth day.
For substances with longer half-lives (e.g., diazepam), symptoms may not develop for more than
1 week, peak in intensity during the second week, and decrease markedly during the third or
fourth week. There may be additional longer-term symptoms at a much lower level of intensity
that persist for several months.
The longer the substance has been taken and the higher the dosages used, the more likely
there will be severe withdrawal. However, withdrawal has been reported with as little as 15 mg
of diazepam (or its equivalent in other benzodiazepines) when taken daily for several months.
Doses of approximately 40 mg of diazepam (or its equivalent) daily are more likely to produce
clinically relevant withdrawal symptoms, and even higher doses (e.g., 100 mg of diazepam) are
more likely to be followed by withdrawal seizures or delirium. Sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic
withdrawal delirium is characterized by disturbances in consciousness and cognition, with visual,
tactile, or auditory hallucinations. When present, sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic withdrawal
delirium should be diagnosed instead of withdrawal.

Prevalence
The prevalence of sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic withdrawal is unknown.

Diagnostic Markers
Seizures and autonomic instability in the setting of a history of prolonged exposure to sedative,
hypnotic, or anxiolytic medications suggest a high likelihood of sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic
withdrawal.

Differential Diagnosis
Other medical conditions.

The symptoms of sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic withdrawal may be
mimicked by other medical conditions (e.g., hypoglycemia, diabetic ketoacidosis). If seizures are
a feature of the sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic withdrawal, the
631


