<<<PAGE 19>>>

Disorders of perception

Changes in quality
It is mainly visual perceptions that are affected by this, brought about by
toxic substances. Colouring of yellow, green and red have been named
xanthopsia, chloropsia and erythropsia. These are mainly the result of drugs
(for example, santonin, poisoning with mescaline or digitalis) used in the
past to treat various disorders. The qualitative change most associated with
drugs now is the metallic taste associated with the use of lithium, although
this is not a hallucination but a true change in gustation. In derealisation
everything appears unreal and strange, while in mania objects look perfect
and beautiful.

Changes in spatial form (dysmegalopsia)
This refers to a change in the perceived shape of an object. Micropsia is a
visual disorder in which the patient sees objects as smaller than they really
are. The opposite kind of visual experience is known as macropsia or
megalopsia. This definition of micropsia includes the experience of the
retreat of objects into the distance without any change in size although some
authors call this porropsia. The terms macropsia and micropsia have also
been used to describe the changes of size in dreams and hallucinations
(Lilliputian hallucinations). Some authors reserve the term dysmegalopsia
to describe objects that are perceived to be larger (or smaller) on one side
than the other (Sims, 2003), while others use the term generically to
describe any change in perceived size (Hamilton, 1974). Others use the term
metamorphosia rather than dysmegalopsia to describe objects that are
irregular in shape.
Dysmegalopsia can result from retinal disease, disorders of accommodation
and convergence but most commonly from temporal and parietal lobe
lesions. Rarely, it can be associated with schizophrenia. In oedema of the
retina visual elements are separated so that the image falls on what is
functionally a smaller part of the retina than usual. This gives rise to
micropsia. Scarring of the retina with retraction naturally produces macropsia,
but as the distortion produced by scarring is usually irregular, metamorphopsia
is more likely to result.
Complete paralysis of accommodation or overactivity of accommodation
during near vision is likely to cause macropsia, while partial paralysis of
accommodation will lead to the experience during near vision that the object
is very near, i.e. micropsia will occur. If accommodation is normal but
convergence is weakened, macropsia occurs and vice versa.
Despite the fact that disorders of accommodation and convergence can
cause dysmegalopsia, it is not common to meet cases in which the visual
disorder is the result of a failure of these peripheral mechanisms. Occasionally
dysmegalopsia may occur in poisoning with atropine or hyoscine. Although
hypoxia and rapid acceleration of the body can disturb accommodation and
convergence, dysmegalopsia is rare among high-altitude pilots. Sometimes
the nerves controlling accommodation are affected by conditions such as
15


