<<<PAGE 4>>>

delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries. Dotted and dashed lines on maps represent
approximate border lines for which there may not yet be full agreement.
The mention of specific companies or of certain manufacturers’ products does not imply
that they are endorsed or recommended by WHO in preference to others of a similar nature
that are not mentioned. Errors and omissions excepted, the names of proprietary products
are distinguished by initial capital letters.
All reasonable precautions have been taken by WHO to verify the information contained in
this publication. However, the published material is being distributed without warranty of
any kind, either expressed or implied. The responsibility for the interpretation and use of
the material lies with the reader. In no event shall WHO be liable for damages arising from
its use.
Correct use of ICD-11
Please refer to the reference guide for the correct use of ICD-11
(https://icdcdn.who.int/icd11referenceguide/en/html/index.html).
For coding the API must be used. For use of the API or coding tool, (see https://icd.who.int).
To prevent the dilution of ICD’s purpose to provide a definitive standard for identifying
health information, ICD-11 may not be used for the purpose of developing or promoting a
different standard.
The use of ICD-11 in software products is subject to the following license:
https://icd.who.int/en/docs/ICD11-license.pdf. Under the terms of this license, users may
not:
•

reproduce ICD-11 in part or whole and distribute it under a different name or without
attribution;

•

reproduce and distribute ICD-11 in part or whole without the ICD-11 codes;

•

reproduce ICD-11 in part or whole without the ICD-11 URIs (not applicable for print
publications).

Mappings or crosslinks between other classifications and terminologies and ICD-11 and/or
translations are not covered by the ICD-11 license and are subject to a separate written
agreement from WHO.
Adding data fields to ICD-11 concepts is permitted, provided such additions are clearly
identified as additions that do not originate from WHO.
Suggestions for changes to ICD-11 should be submitted as a proposal to the ICD-11
maintenance platform (https://icd.who.int/en).
0 ICD-11 Reference Guide
0.1 Copyright page
0.2 How to use this Reference Guide
0.3 Table of Acronyms and Abbreviations
2

ICD-11 MMS




<<<PAGE 25>>>

0.3 Table of Acronyms and Abbreviations
Acronym

In Full

AMR

Antimicrobial Resistance

ATC/DDD

The Anatomical Therapeutic Chemical Classification with Defined Daily
Doses

DRG

Diagnostic Related Group

DSAP

Duration Stated, developed After Procedure

DSM-(5 or
V)

Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (fifth edition)

ICD

The International Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems

ICD-O

The International Classification of Disease for Oncology

ICECI

The International Classification of External Causes of Injury

ICF

The International Classification of Functioning, Disability, and Health

ICHI

The International Classification of Health Interventions

ICNP

The International Classification of Nursing Practice

ICPC

The International Classification of Primary Care

INN

International Non-proprietary Names

ISO9999

International Standards Organization for Technical aids for persons with
disabilities

MMS

Mortality and Morbidity Statistics

NEC

in an ICD category, indicates Not Elsewhere Classified

NOS

in an ICD category, indicates Not Otherwise Specified

OCPR

Other Cause of Procedure Required

PCL

Primary Care Low Resources Settings

SMoL

Startup Mortality List

TAG

Topic Advisory Group

TM

Traditional Medicine

URI

Uniform Resource Identifier

WHODAS

The World Health Organization Disability Assessment Scale

WHO-FIC

The World Health Organization - Family of International Classifications

WM

Western Medicine

WONCA

World Organization of National Colleges, Academies, and Academic
Associations of General Practice/Family Practitioners

0.4 Glossary

ICD-11 Reference Guide

23




<<<PAGE 52>>>

Exclusions serve as a cross reference in ICD and help to delineate the boundaries of a
category.
General exclusions for a range of categories or for all subcategories are found in the notes
heading ‘Excludes’, immediately following a chapter, group or category title.
Multiple parenting in ICD-11 shows categories in the context of siblings that are placed
elsewhere in the classification. This is also an indication of an exclusion and means ‘a sibling
is coded elsewhere’. In the print and the electronic version this is marked with the label
‘code elsewhere’.
2.7.2.1 ‘Code also’ and ‘Use additional code, if desired’ instructions
‘Code also’ instructions inform the user about required additional aetiological information
which is mandatory to be coded in a cluster with certain categories because that additional
information is relevant for primary tabulation. The ‘code also’ statement marks the
categories that must be used in conjunction with the indicated second code(s). However, in
some instances aetiology may be unknown although the condition requires treatment in its
own right. In this circumstance, the code may be reported alone.
For example, the category Diabetic cataract indicates ‘code also’ type of diabetes. This
means that in conjunction with the code for ‘diabetic cataract’, the code for the type of
diabetes should be assigned. Both stem codes for the type of diabetes and the diabetic
cataract are always reported in a cluster.
‘Use additional code, if desired’ - instructions inform the user about optional additional
detail that can be coded.
2.7.3 ‘NEC’ and ‘NOS’
2.7.3.1 ‘NEC’
The stem ‘not elsewhere classified’, when used in a category title, serve as a warning that
certain specified variants of the listed conditions may appear in other parts of the
classification. For example, NF09 Adverse effects, not elsewhere classified. Codes to which
the NEC description is appended should only be used if one of the other options available in
the classification is not suitable.
2.7.3.2 ‘NOS’
The letters NOS are an abbreviation for the term ‘not otherwise specified’, implying that the
documentation that is used for classifying does not provide more detail beyond the term
provided. It implies ‘unspecified’, ‘incompletely specified’ or ‘unqualified’. Sometimes an
unqualified term is nevertheless classified to a rubric for a more specific type of the
condition. This is because, in medical terminology, the most common form of a condition is
often known by the generic name of the condition itself and only the less common types are
qualified. For example, ‘pharyngitis’ is commonly used to mean ‘acute pharyngitis’. These
inbuilt assumptions have been taken into account in order to avoid incorrect classification.
Careful inspection of inclusion terms will reveal where an assumption of cause has been
accounted for. Coders should be careful not to code a term as unqualified unless it is quite
clear that no information is available that would permit a more specific assignment
50

ICD-11 MMS




<<<PAGE 54>>>

2.7.7 ‘Due to’ and ‘Associated with’
‘Due to’ is the preferred term for categories where two conditions are mentioned, and a
causal sequence exists between them. Other terms, such as ‘caused by’ or ‘attributed to’ are
allowable synonyms. The phrase ‘secondary to’ is equivalent and may also be included as a
synonym. ‘Associated with’ is the preferred term for categories where two conditions are
mentioned but there is no causal sequence implied.
2.7.8 Spelling, parentheses, grammar and other conventions
Spelling and grammar of ICD-11 follow the British rules with exceptions and amendments
conforming to WHO spelling rules. The detailed conventions are listed below. The ICD-11
terminology uses the following conventions:
•

Terms are listed in their singular form. For example, ‘Superficial injury of scalp’
instead of ‘Superficial injuries of scalp’. There are exceptions when the singular form
doesn’t apply, such as ‘Multiple injuries of head’, and when a term describes a group
of diseases, such as “Benign vascular neoplasms”.
•
No use of apostrophes with eponyms. For example, ‘Hodgkin lymphoma’ (instead of
‘Hodgkin’s lymphoma’)
•
Entities are described using natural language. For example, ‘myocardial infarction’
(instead of ‘infarction, myocardial’).
•
Abbreviations are printed using upper case letters and followed by the complete title
in full. For example, ‘MI – [myocardial infarction]’.
•
Parentheses are used in the tabular list to enclose the code to which an exclusion
term refers. For example, 9A01.3 Infectious blepharitis Exclusions:
Blepharoconjunctivitis (9A60.4)
2.7.9 General features
The main structural innovation of ICD–11 is that it is built on a Foundation component from
which the tabular lists (such as the classification for morbidity and mortality statistics) is
derived. See 1.2.5 Foundation Component and Tabular lists of ICD–11.
Table 1: ICD-11 Terminology

52

ICD-11 MMS




<<<PAGE 372>>>

Part 1 - is used for diseases or conditions that form part of the sequence of events leading
directly to death. The immediate (direct) cause of death is entered on the first line, 1(a).
There must always be an entry on line 1(a). The entry on line l(a) may be the only condition
reported in Part I of the certificate. Where there are two or more conditions that form part
of the sequence of events leading directly to death, each event in the sequence should be
recorded on a separate line.
In any case you must record the disease, injury or external cause that resulted in the death.
Do not record only the mode of dying, such as cardiac arrest, respiratory failure or heart
failure.
Try to be as specific as you can. “Unknown” cause of death should be recorded in cases
where thorough testing or autopsy examination the cause of death cannot be determined.
Stating “Unknown” is better than any speculation on the possible cause of death.
Always fully spell out all terms. Abbreviations can be interpreted in different ways. Terms
such as “suspected” or “possible” are ignored in evaluation of the entries. For example
“suspected Diabetes” will be interpreted as “Diabetes”. The four lines may not provide
enough space for the chain of events. Do not waste space with unnecessary words. Some
clinical terms are very vague. For example, “tumour” does not specify behaviour (see also
last page of this flyer).
Duration - is the time interval between the onset of each condition that is entered on the
certificate (not the time of diagnosis of the condition), and the date of death. The duration
information is useful in coding certain diseases and also provides a useful check on the order
of the reported sequence of conditions.
Part 2 - is used for conditions that do not belong in Part 1 but their presence contributed to
death.
Frame B: Some detail is frequently forgotten in Part 1 and 2 (Frame A). Separate detailed
questions ask for detail such as previous surgery, mode of death or place of occurrence.
Frame B is not shown in this information sheet. It is self-explanatory.
Cause of Death on the certificate - step by step
•

•

•

370

Start at line 1(a), with the immediate (direct) cause, then go back in time to
preceding conditions until you get to the one that started the sequence of events.
You will get very close to the time the patient was healthy.
Now, you should have reported the underlying or originating cause on the lowest
used line and a sequence of events leads from the underlying cause up to the
immediate (direct) cause in the first line 1(a).
Finally, record the time interval between the onset of each condition entered on the
certificate and the date of death. Where the time or date of onset is not known you

ICD-11 MMS




<<<PAGE 373>>>

should record a best estimate. Enter the unit of time (minutes, hours, days, weeks,
months, years).

Example
•
•
•
•
•

Write clearly and do not use abbreviations.
Be sure the information is complete.
Do not speculate on the cause of death.
Do not fill in laboratory results or statements like “found by partner” (there may be
separate fields on the form for this kind of information).
One condition per line should be sufficient.

Frequently used ill-defined terms

ICD-11 Reference Guide

371


