<<<PAGE 205>>>

for therapeutic reasons. Ingestion of 500 mg/kg of aspirin may be fatal. Most
patients will develop symptoms of toxicity when salicylate levels are greater
than 40 mg/dL. Common symptoms of toxicity include acid–base
abnormalities, tachypnea, tinnitus, nausea, and vomiting. In cases of severe
toxicity, symptoms may include hyperthermia, altered mental status,
pulmonary edema, and death.
Antipsychotic Agents
CLOZAPINE. Clozapine (Clozaril) levels are trough levels determined in the

morning before administration of the morning dose of medication. A
therapeutic range for clozapine has not been established; however, a level of
100 mg/mL is widely considered to be the minimum therapeutic threshold. At
least 350 mg/mL of clozapine is considered to be necessary to achieve
therapeutic response in patients with refractory schizophrenia. The likelihood
of seizures and other side effects increase with clozapine levels greater than
1,200 mg/mL or doses greater than 600 mg per day or both. Clozapine is a
common cause of leukopenia in psychiatry. When moderate to severe
leucopenia develops, clozapine treatment must be interrupted, but patients
may be retreated with clozapine in the future.
Mood Stabilizers
Carbamazepine (Tegretol) may produce changes in the
levels of white blood cells, platelets, and, under rare circumstances, red blood
cells. Anemia, aplastic anemia, leucopenia, and thrombocytopenia may all
occur but are rare. Pretreatment evaluations typically include CBC.
Carbamazepine may produce hyponatremia. This hyponatremia is usually
mild and does not produce clinical symptoms. However, carbamazepine may
cause the syndrome of inappropriate secretion of antidiuretic hormone
(SIADH). Carbamazepine may produce a variety of congenital abnormalities,
including spina bifida and anomalies of the fingers. Manifestations of toxicity
may include nausea, vomiting, urinary retention, ataxia, confusion,
drowsiness, agitation, or nystagmus. At very high levels, symptoms may also
include cardiac dysrhythmias, seizures, and respiratory depression.
CARBAMAZEPINE.




<<<PAGE 1198>>>

Medications are the treatments of choice for patients with bipolar disorders.
However, psychotherapies can offer an essential adjunct to treatment.
Somatic Treatments
Pharmacotherapy
GENERAL CLINICAL GUIDELINES. We can divide the pharmacologic treatment of

bipolar disorders into acute and maintenance phases. Bipolar treatment,
however, also involves the formulation of different strategies for the patient
who is experiencing mania or hypomania or depression. Lithium and its
augmentation by antidepressants, antipsychotics, and benzodiazepines have
been the principal approach to the illness. However, three anticonvulsant
mood stabilizers—carbamazepine, valproate, and lamotrigine—are
commonly used options, as well as a series of atypical antipsychotics. Often,
it is necessary to try different medications before finding an optimal
treatment. Furthermore, although one strives for monotherapy, in the case of
bipolar disorder, polypharmacy is common.
Table 6-6
Recommendations for Pharmacologic Treatment of Acute
Mania
First line

Monotherapy: lithium, divalproex, divalproex ER,
olanzapine, risperidone, quetiapine, quetiapine
XR, aripiprazole, ziprasidone, asenapine,
paliperidone ER, cariprazine
Adjunctive therapy with lithium or divalproex:
risperidone, quetiapine, olanzapine,
aripiprazole, asenapine

Second line

Monotherapy: carbamazepine, carbamazepine
ER, ECT, haloperidol
Combination therapy: lithium + divalproex

Third line

Monotherapy: chlorpromazine, clozapine,
tamoxifen




<<<PAGE 1199>>>

Combination therapy: lithium or divalproex +
haloperidol, lithium + carbamazepine,
adjunctive tamoxifen
Not
Monotherapy: gabapentin, topiramate, lamotrigine,
recommended
verapamil, tiagabine
Combination therapy: risperidone +
carbamazepine, olanzapine + carbamazepine
ECT, electroconvulsive therapy; XR or ER, extended release.
Modified from CANMAT/ISBD Guidelines.

Table 6-6 lists some recommended medications for treating acute mania.
Adherence to treatment, however, is often a problem because patients with
mania frequently lack insight into their illness and refuse to take medication.
Because impaired judgment, impulsivity, and aggressiveness combine to put
the patient or others at risk, we must medicate patients when we need to
protect themselves and others from harm.
INITIAL MEDICATION SELECTION. Figure 6-2 diagrams a strategy for selecting

and preparing a bipolar patient for pharmacotherapy.
Acute Mania. The treatment of acute mania, or hypomania, usually is the
most straightforward phase to treat. We can use agents alone or in
combination to bring the patient down from a high.
Lithium Carbonate. Lithium carbonate is considered the prototypical mood
stabilizer. However, because the onset of antimanic action with lithium can
be slow, we often supplement it in the early phases of treatment by atypical
antipsychotics, mood-stabilizing anticonvulsants, or high-potency
benzodiazepines. Therapeutic lithium levels are between 0.6 and 1.2 mEq/L.
The acute use of lithium has been limited in recent years by its unpredictable
efficacy, problematic side effects, and the need for frequent laboratory tests.
The introduction of newer drugs with more favorable side effects, lower
toxicity, and less need for frequent laboratory testing has resulted in a decline
in lithium use. For many patients, however, its clinical benefits can be
remarkable.




<<<PAGE 1200>>>

Anticonvulsants. Valproate (valproic acid or divalproex sodium) has
surpassed lithium in use for acute mania. Unlike lithium, valproate is only
indicated for acute mania, although most experts agree it also has
prophylactic effects. Normal dose levels of valproic acid are 750 to 2,500
mg/day, achieving blood levels between 50 and 120 µg/mL. Rapid oral
loading with 15 to 20 mg/kg of divalproex sodium from day 1 of treatment
has been well tolerated and associated with a rapid onset of response. Some
laboratory testing is required during valproate treatment.
Carbamazepine has been used worldwide for decades as a first-line
treatment for acute mania. The FDA approved it for acute mania in the
United States in 2004. Typical doses of carbamazepine to treat acute mania
range between 600 and 1,800 mg/day associated with blood levels of between
4 and 12 µg/mL. The keto congener of carbamazepine, oxcarbazepine, is
better tolerated than carbamazepine, but the data for its efficacy are
conflicting. A Cochrane review concluded there is insufficient evidence for
this medication in acute mania.
Antipsychotics. The FDA approved many of the atypical antipsychotics for
use in bipolar disorder. We list them in Table 6-7. Compared with older
agents, such as haloperidol and chlorpromazine, atypical antipsychotics have
a lesser liability for excitatory postsynaptic potential and tardive dyskinesia;
many do not increase prolactin. However, many of them have the risk of
weight gain with its associated medical problems. Some patients, however,
require maintenance treatment with antipsychotic medication.
Acute Bipolar Depression
Lithium. There is limited evidence for lithium in bipolar depression. Early
studies were promising, but later placebo-controlled studies did not confirm
lithium’s efficacy. More extensive studies that included lithium did suggest
that lithium was at least as useful as other mood stabilizers for bipolar
depression.
Anticonvulsants. The most promising anticonvulsant has been lamotrigine,
which has several reasonable studies showing efficacy for bipolar depression.
Its major limitation is that it must be titrated gradually to prevent a severe




<<<PAGE 1817>>>

EEG

Low-dose
antipsychotics

Predatory aggression
(cold blooded
revenge/cruelty)

No Effective
Pharmacologic Tx

Benzodiazepines
(disinhibition)

Organic-like aggression
(traumatic brain
injury)

Beta-Blockers,
Valproates,
Quetiapine,
Carbamazepine
(CBMZ), TCAs,
cholinesterase
inhibitors
(donepezil)

Benzodiazepines
(disinhibition,
delirium)

Ictal aggression
(abnormal EEG)

CBMZ,
TCAs, Low-potency
Diphenylhydantoin,
typical
Valproate
antipsychotics
Benzodiazepines
(both increase
(clonazepam)
risk of seizures)

III. Social and Emotional Detachment
Chronic asociality and disinterest
Blunted affect

Low-Dose
Antipsychotics
(aripiprazole,
olanzapine, lowdose clozapine,
sulpiride)

IV. Cognitive-Perceptual Distortions/Psychotic Symptoms
Acute and brief
psychotic episodes

Novel Antipsychotics
(Risperdal,
olanzapine)
Typical neuroleptics
(for the duration of




<<<PAGE 1944>>>

Drug Interactions. Clozapine should not be used with any other drug that
is associated with the development of agranulocytosis or bone marrow
suppression. Such drugs include carbamazepine, phenytoin, propylthiouracil,
sulfonamides, and captopril (Capoten). Lithium combined with clozapine
may increase the risk of seizures, confusion, and movement disorders.
Lithium should not be used in combination with clozapine by persons who
have experienced an episode of neuroleptic malignant syndrome.
Clomipramine (Anafranil) can increase the risk of seizure by lowering the
seizure threshold and by increasing clozapine plasma concentrations.
Risperidone, fluoxetine, paroxetine, and fluvoxamine increase serum
concentrations of clozapine. The addition of paroxetine may precipitate
clozapine-associated neutropenia.
Side Effects. The most common drug-related adverse effects are sedation,
dizziness, syncope, tachycardia, hypotension, electrocardiography (ECG)
changes, nausea, and vomiting. Other common adverse effects include
fatigue, weight gain, various GI symptoms (most commonly constipation),
anticholinergic effects, and subjective muscle weakness. Sialorrhea, or
hypersalivation, is a side effect that begins early in treatment and is most
evident at night. Patients report that their pillows are drenched with saliva.
This side effect is most likely the result of impairment of swallowing.
Although there are reports that clonidine or amitriptyline may help reduce
hypersalivation, the most practical solution is to put a towel over the pillow.
The risk of seizures is about 4 percent in patients taking dosages greater
than 600 mg a day. Leukopenia, granulocytopenia, agranulocytosis, and fever
occur in about 1 percent of patients. During the first year of treatment, there
is a 0.73 percent risk of clozapineinduced agranulocytosis. The risk during the second year is 0.07 percent. For
neutropenia, the risk is 2.32 percent and 0.69 percent, respectively, during the
first and second years of treatment. The only contraindications to the use of
clozapine are a WBC count below 3,500 cells/mm3; a previous bone marrow
disorder; a history of agranulocytosis during clozapine treatment; or the use
of another drug that is known to suppress the bone marrow, such as
carbamazepine (Tegretol).
During the first 6 months of treatment, weekly WBC counts are indicated
to monitor the patient for the development of agranulocytosis. If the WBC




<<<PAGE 1964>>>

antagonists

inhibits metabolism of
propranolol;
antipsychotic increases
plasma concentrations

Anticholinergics

Pharmacodynamic effects

Decreased
antipsychotic
effect

Additive anticholinergic
effect

Anticholinergic
toxicity

Barbiturates

Phenobarbital induces
Decreased
antipsychotic metabolism
antipsychotic
concentrations

Carbamazepine

Induces antipsychotic
metabolism

Charcoal

Reduces GI absorption of May reduce
antipsychotic and
antipsychotic
adsorbs drug during
effect or cause
enterohepatic circulation
toxicity when used
to treat overdose
or for GI
disturbances

Cigarette
smoking

Induction of microsomal
enzymes

Up to 50% reduction
in antipsychotic
concentrations

Reduced plasma
concentrations of
antipsychotic
agents

Epinephrine,
Antipsychotic antagonizes
norepinephrine
pressor effect

Hypotension

Ethanol

Impaired
psychomotor
status

Additive CNS depression




<<<PAGE 2077>>>

depressant (e.g., alcohol), and increased severity of extrapyramidal
symptoms, which usually responds to treatment with antiparkinsonian drugs.
Valproate can usually be safely combined with carbamazepine or SDAs.
Perhaps the most worrisome interaction of valproate and a psychotropic drug
involves lamotrigine. Since the approval of lamotrigine for the treatment of
bipolar disorder, it is more likely that patients will be treated with both
agents. Valproate more than doubles lamotrigine concentrations, increasing
the risk of a severe rash (Stevens–Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal
necrolysis).
The plasma concentrations of carbamazepine, diazepam (Valium),
amitriptyline (Elavil), nortriptyline (Pamelor), and phenobarbital (Luminal)
may also be increased when these drugs are coadministered with valproate.
Also, the plasma concentrations of phenytoin (Dilantin) and desipramine
(Norpramin) may be decreased when they are combined with valproate. The
plasma concentrations of valproate may be decreased when the drug is
coadministered with carbamazepine and may be increased when
coadministered with guanfacine (Tenex), amitriptyline, or fluoxetine
(Prozac). Valproate can be displaced from plasma proteins by carbamazepine,
diazepam, and aspirin. Persons who are treated with anticoagulants (e.g.,
aspirin and warfarin [Coumadin]) should also be monitored when valproate
use is initiated to assess the development of any undesired augmentation of
the anticoagulation effects. Interactions of valproate with other drugs are
listed in Table 21-34.
Table 21-34
Interactions of Valproate with Other Drugs
Drug

Interactions Reported with Valproate

Lithium

Increased tremor

Antipsychotics

Increased sedation; increased extrapyramidal
effects; delirium and stupor (single report)

Clozapine

Increased sedation; confusional syndrome (single
report)

Carbamazepine Acute psychosis (single report); ataxia, nausea,




<<<PAGE 2084>>>

Laboratory Interferences
Lamotrigine does not interfere with any laboratory tests.
Dosage and Administration
In the clinical trials leading to the approval of lamotrigine as a treatment for
bipolar disorder, no consistent increase in efficacy was associated with doses
above 200 mg/day. Most patients should take between 100 and 200 mg a day.
In epilepsy, the drug is administered twice daily, but in bipolar disorder, the
total dose can be taken once a day, either in the morning or night, depending
on whether the patient finds the drug activating or sedating.
Lamotrigine is available as unscored 25-, 100-, 150-, and 200-mg tablets.
The primary determinant of lamotrigine dosing is the minimization of the risk
of rash. Lamotrigine should not be taken by anyone younger than 16 years of
age. Because valproic acid markedly slows the elimination of lamotrigine,
concomitant administration of these two drugs necessitates a much slower
titration (Table 21-37). People with renal insufficiency should aim for a lower
maintenance dosage. The appearance of any rash necessitates immediate
discontinuation of lamotrigine administration. Lamotrigine should usually be
discontinued gradually over 2 weeks unless a rash emerges, in which case it
should be discontinued over 1 to 2 days.
Lamotrigine orally disintegrating tablets (Lamictal ODT) are available for
patients who have difficulty swallowing. It is the only antiepileptic treatment
that is available in an orally disintegrating formulation. It is available in 25,
50, 100, and 200 mg strengths and matches the dose of lamotrigine tablets.
Chewable dispersible tablets of 2, 5, and 25 mg are also available.

CARBAMAZEPINE AND OXCARBAZEPINE
Carbamazepine (Tegretol) possesses some structural similarity to the TCA
imipramine (Tofranil). It was approved for use in the United States for the
treatment of trigeminal neuralgia in 1968 and temporal lobe epilepsy
(complex partial seizures) in 1974. Interestingly, carbamazepine was first
synthesized as a potential antidepressant, but because of its atypical profile in
several animal models, it was initially developed for use in pain and seizure
disorders. It is now recognized in most guidelines as a second-line mood




<<<PAGE 2085>>>

stabilizer useful in the treatment and prevention of both phases of bipolar
affective disorder. A long-acting sustained release formulation (Equetro) was
approved by the U.S. FDA for the treatment of acute mania in 2002.
Table 21-37
Lamotrigine Dosing (mg/day)
Treatment

Weeks 1–2

Weeks
3–4

Weeks 4–5

Lamotrigine
monotherapy

25

50

100–200 (200
maximum)

Lamotrigine +
carbamazepine

50

100

200–400 (400
maximum)

Lamotrigine +
valproate

25 every other 25
day

50–100 (100
maximum)

An analog of carbamazepine, oxcarbazepine (Trileptal), was marketed as
an antiseizure medication in the United States in 2000. Previously it was used
as a treatment for pediatric epilepsy in Europe since 1990. Because of its
similarity to carbamazepine, many clinicians began to use it as a treatment for
patients with bipolar disorder. Despite some reports that oxcarbazepine has
mood-stabilizing properties, this has not been confirmed in large, placebocontrolled trials.
Carbamazepine
Pharmacologic Actions. The absorption of carbamazepine is slow and
unpredictable. Food enhances absorption. Peak plasma concentrations are
reached 2 to 8 hours after a single dose, and steady-state levels are reached
after 2 to 4 days on a steady dosage. It is 70 to 80 percent protein-bound. The
half-life of carbamazepine ranges from 18 to 54 hours, with an average of 26
hours. However, with chronic administration, the half-life of carbamazepine
decreases to an average of 12 hours. This results from the induction of
hepatic CYP450 enzymes by carbamazepine, specifically the autoinduction
of carbamazepine metabolism. The induction of hepatic enzymes reaches its




<<<PAGE 2086>>>

maximum level after about 3 to 5 weeks of therapy.
The pharmacokinetics of carbamazepine are different for two long-acting
preparations of carbamazepine, each of which uses slightly different
technology. One formulation, Tegretol XR, requires food to ensure standard
GI transit time. The other preparation, Carbatrol, relies on a combination of
intermediate, extended-release, and very slow release beads, making it
suitable for bedtime administration.
Carbamazepine is metabolized in the liver, and the 10,11-epoxide
metabolite is active as an anticonvulsant. Its activity in the treatment of
bipolar disorders is unknown. Long-term use of carbamazepine is associated
with an increased ratio of the epoxide to the parent molecule.
The anticonvulsant effects of carbamazepine are thought to be mediated
mainly by binding to voltage-dependent sodium channels in the inactive state
and prolonging their inactivation. This action secondarily reduces voltagedependent calcium channel activation and, thus, synaptic transmission.
Additional effects include reduction of currents through N-methyl-D-aspartate
(NMDA) glutamate-receptor channels, competitive antagonism of adenosine
a1-receptors, and potentiation of CNS catecholamine neurotransmission.
Whether any or all of these mechanisms also result in mood stabilization is
not known.
Therapeutic Indications
Bipolar Disorder
ACUTE MANIA. The acute antimanic effects of carbamazepine are typically
evident within the first several days of treatment. About 50 to 70 percent of
all persons respond within 2 to 3 weeks of initiation. Studies suggest that
carbamazepine may be especially useful in persons who are not responsive to
lithium (Eskalith), such as persons with dysphoric mania, rapid cycling, or an
adverse family history of mood disorders. The antimanic effects of
carbamazepine can be, and often are, augmented by concomitant
administration of lithium, valproic acid (Depakene), thyroid hormones,
DRAs, or SDAs. Some persons may respond to carbamazepine but not
lithium or valproic acid and vice versa.




<<<PAGE 2087>>>

PROPHYLAXIS. Carbamazepine is effective in preventing relapses, particularly

among patients with bipolar II disorder and schizoaffective disorder, and
dysphoric mania.
ACUTE DEPRESSION. A subgroup of treatment-refractory patients with acute

depression responds well to carbamazepine. Patients with more severe
episodic and less chronic depression seem to be better responders to
carbamazepine. Nevertheless, carbamazepine remains an alternative drug for
depressed persons who have not responded to conventional treatments,
including ECT.
OTHER DISORDERS. Carbamazepine helps to control symptoms associated with

acute alcohol withdrawal, although benzodiazepines are more effective in this
population. Carbamazepine has been suggested as a treatment for the
recurrent paroxysmal component of PTSD. Uncontrolled studies suggest that
carbamazepine is effective in controlling impulsive, aggressive behavior in
nonpsychotic persons of all ages, including children and elderly persons.
Carbamazepine is also effective in controlling nonacute agitation and
aggressive behavior in patients with schizophrenia and schizoaffective
disorder. Persons with prominent positive symptoms (e.g., hallucinations)
may be likely to respond, as are persons who display impulsive aggressive
outbursts.
Precautions and Adverse Reactions. Carbamazepine is relatively well
tolerated. Mild GI (nausea, vomiting, gastric distress, constipation, diarrhea,
and anorexia) and CNS (ataxia, drowsiness) side effects are the most
common. The severity of these adverse effects is reduced if the dosage of
carbamazepine is increased slowly and kept at the minimal effective plasma
concentration. In contrast to lithium and valproate (other drugs used to
manage bipolar disorder), carbamazepine does not appear to cause weight
gain. Because of the phenomena of autoinduction, with consequent
reductions in carbamazepine concentrations, side effect tolerability may
improve over time. Most of the adverse effects of carbamazepine are
correlated with plasma concentrations above 9 µg/mL. The rarest but most
serious adverse effects of carbamazepine are blood dyscrasias, hepatitis, and
severe skin reactions (Table 21-38).




<<<PAGE 2088>>>

BLOOD DYSCRASIAS. The drug’s hematologic effects are not dose-related.

Severe blood dyscrasias (aplastic anemia, agranulocytosis) occur in about 1
in 125,000 persons treated with carbamazepine. There does not appear to be a
correlation between the degree of benign WBC suppression (leukopenia),
which is seen in 1 to 2 percent of persons, and the emergence of lifethreatening blood dyscrasias. Persons should be warned that the emergence of
such symptoms as fever, sore throat, rash, petechiae, bruising, and easy
bleeding can potentially herald a serious dyscrasia, and they should seek
medical evaluation immediately. Routine hematologic monitoring in
carbamazepine-treated persons is recommended at 3, 6, 9, and 12 months. If
there is no significant evidence of bone marrow suppression by that time,
many experts will reduce the interval of monitoring. However, even
assiduous monitoring may fail to detect severe blood dyscrasias before they
cause symptoms.
Table 21-38
Adverse Events Associated with Carbamazepine
Dosage-Related Adverse Effects

Idiosyncratic Adverse Effects

Double or blurred vision

Agranulocytosis

Vertigo

Stevens–Johnson syndrome

Gastrointestinal disturbances

Aplastic anemia

Task performance impairment

Hepatic failure

Hematologic effects

Rash
Pancreatitis

HEPATITIS. Within the first few weeks of therapy, carbamazepine can cause

both hepatitis associated with increases in liver enzymes, particularly
transaminases, and cholestasis associated with elevated bilirubin and alkaline
phosphatase. Mild transaminase elevations warrant observation only, but
persistent elevations more than three times the upper limit of normal indicate
the need to discontinue the drug. Hepatitis can recur if the drug is
reintroduced to the person and can result in death.




<<<PAGE 2089>>>

About 10 to 15 percent of those treated with
carbamazepine develop a benign maculopapular rash within the first 3 weeks
of treatment. Stopping the medication usually leads to resolution of the rash.
Some patients may experience life-threatening dermatologic syndromes,
including exfoliative dermatitis, erythema multiforme, Stevens–Johnson
syndrome, and toxic epidermal necrolysis. The possible emergence of these
serious dermatologic problems causes most clinicians to discontinue
carbamazepine use in people who develop any rash. The risk of drug rash is
about equal between valproic acid and carbamazepine in the first 2 months of
use but is subsequently much higher for carbamazepine. If carbamazepine
seems to be the only effective drug for a person who has a benign rash with
carbamazepine treatment, a retrial of the drug can be undertaken. Many
patients can be rechallenged without reemergence of the rash. Pretreatment
with prednisone (Deltasone; 40 mg a day) may suppress the rash, although
other symptoms of an allergic reaction (e.g., fever and pneumonitis) may
develop even with steroid pretreatment.
DERMATOLOGIC EFFECTS.

Carbamazepine is occasionally used to treat diabetes
insipidus not associated with lithium use. This activity results from direct or
indirect effects at the vasopressin receptor. It may also lead to the
development of hyponatremia and water intoxication in some patients,
mainly elderly persons, or when used in high doses.
RENAL EFFECTS.

Carbamazepine decreases cardiac conduction
(although less than the tricyclic drugs do) and can thus exacerbate preexisting
cardiac disease. Carbamazepine should be used with caution in persons with
glaucoma, prostatic hypertrophy, diabetes, or a history of alcohol abuse.
Carbamazepine occasionally activates vasopressin receptor function, which
results in a condition resembling the syndrome of secretion of inappropriate
antidiuretic hormone, characterized by hyponatremia and, rarely, water
intoxication. This effect is the opposite of the renal effects of lithium (i.e.,
nephrogenic diabetes insipidus). Augmentation of lithium with
carbamazepine does not reverse the lithium effect, however. The emergence
of confusion, severe weakness, or headache in a person taking carbamazepine
should prompt the measurement of serum electrolytes.
Carbamazepine use rarely elicits an immune hypersensitivity response
OTHER ADVERSE EFFECTS.




<<<PAGE 2090>>>

consisting of fever, rash, eosinophilia, and possibly fatal myocarditis.
Cleft palate, fingernail hypoplasia, microcephaly, and spina bifida in
infants may be associated with the maternal use of carbamazepine during
pregnancy. Pregnant women should not use carbamazepine unless necessary.
All women with childbearing potential should take 1 to 4 mg of folic acid
daily, even if they are not trying to conceive. Carbamazepine is secreted in
breast milk.
Drug Interactions. Carbamazepine decreases serum concentrations of
numerous drugs as a result of the prominent induction of hepatic CYP3A4
(Table 21-39). Monitoring for a decrease in clinical effects is frequently
indicated. Carbamazepine can decrease the blood concentrations of oral
contraceptives, resulting in breakthrough bleeding and uncertain prophylaxis
against pregnancy. Carbamazepine should not be administered with MAOIs,
which should be discontinued at least 2 weeks before initiating treatment with
carbamazepine. Grapefruit juice inhibits the hepatic metabolism of
carbamazepine. When carbamazepine and valproate are used in combination,
the dosage of carbamazepine should be decreased because valproate displaces
carbamazepine binding on proteins, and the dosage of valproate may need to
be increased.
Table 21-39
Carbamazepine: Drug Interactions
Effect of Carbamazepine on Plasma Agents that May Affect
Concentrations of Concomitant
Carbamazepine Plasma
Agents
Concentrations
Carbamazepine may decrease drug Agents that may increase
plasma concentration of:
carbamazepine plasma
Acetaminophen
concentration:
Alprazolam
Allopurinol
Amitriptyline
Cimetidine
Bupropion
Clarithromycin
Clomipramine
Danazol
Clonazepam
Diltiazem
Clozapine
Erythromycin




<<<PAGE 2091>>>

Cyclosporine
Desipramine
Dicumarol
Doxepin
Doxycycline
Ethosuximide
Felbamate
Fentanyl
Fluphenazine
Haloperidol
Hormonal contraceptives
Imipramine
Lamotrigine
Methadone
Methsuximide
Methylprednisolone
Nimodipine
Pancuronium
Phensuximide
Phenytoin
Primidone
Theophylline
Valproate
Warfarin
Carbamazepine may increase drug
plasma concentrations of
Clomipramine
Phenytoin
Primidone

Fluoxetine
Fluvoxamine
Gemfibrozil
Itraconazole
Ketoconazole
Isoniazida
Itraconazole
Lamotrigine
Loratadine
Macrolides
Nefazodone
Nicotinamide
Propoxyphene
Terfenadine
Troleandomycin
Valproatea
Verapamil
Viloxazine
Drugs that may decrease
carbamazepine plasma
concentrations
Carbamazepine
(autoinduction)
Cisplatin
Doxorubicin HCl
Felbamate
Phenobarbital
Phenytoin
Primidone
Rifampinb
Theophylline
Valproate

aIncreased concentrations of the active 10,11-epoxide.
bDecreased concentrations of carbamazepine and increased concentrations of the 10,11-

epoxide.
Table by Carlos A. Zarate, Jr., M.D. and Mauricio Tohen, M.D.




<<<PAGE 2092>>>

Laboratory Interferences. Circulating levels of thyroxine and
triiodothyronine are associated with a decrease in TSH and may be associated
with treatment. Carbamazepine is also associated with an increase in total
serum cholesterol, primarily by increasing high-density lipoproteins. The
thyroid and cholesterol effects are not clinically significant. Carbamazepine
may interfere with the dexamethasone (Decadron) suppression test and may
also cause false-positive pregnancy test results.
Dosing and Administration. The target dose for antimanic activity is
1,200 mg a day, although this varies considerably. Immediate-release
carbamazepine needs to be taken three or four times a day, which leads to
lapses in compliance. Extended-release formulations are thus preferred
because they can be taken once or twice a day. One form of extended-release
carbamazepine, Carbatrol, comes as 100-, 200-, and 300-mg capsules.
Another form, Equetro, is identical to Carbatrol and is marketed as a
treatment for bipolar disorder. These capsules contain tiny beads with three
different types of coatings, so they dissolve at different times. Capsules
should not be crushed or chewed. However, the contents can be sprinkled
over food without affecting the extended-release qualities. This formulation
can be taken either with or without meals. The entire daily dose can be given
at bedtime. The rate of absorption is faster when it is given with a high-fat
meal. Another extended-release form of carbamazepine, Tegretol XR, uses a
different drug-delivery system than Carbatrol. It is available in 100-, 200-,
and 300-mg tablets.
Preexisting hematologic, hepatic, and cardiac diseases can be relative
contraindications for carbamazepine treatment. Persons with hepatic disease
require only one-third to one-half the usual dosage; the clinician should be
cautious about raising the dosage in such persons and should do so only
slowly and gradually. The laboratory examination should include a CBC with
platelet count, liver function tests, serum electrolytes, and an
electrocardiogram in persons older than 40 years of age or with preexisting
cardiac disease. An electroencephalogram is not necessary before the
initiation of treatment, but it may be helpful in some cases for the
documentation of objective changes correlated with clinical improvement.
Table 21-40 presents a brief user’s guide to carbamazepine in bipolar
disorder.




<<<PAGE 2093>>>

Routine Laboratory Monitoring. Serum levels for antimanic efficacy
have not been established. The anticonvulsant blood concentration range for
carbamazepine is 4 to 12 µg/mL, and this range should be reached before
determining that carbamazepine is not effective in the treatment of a mood
disorder. A clinically insignificant suppression of the WBC count commonly
occurs during carbamazepine treatment. This benign decrease can be reversed
by adding lithium, which enhances colony-stimulating factor. Potential
serious hematologic effects of carbamazepine, such as pancytopenia,
agranulocytosis, and aplastic anemia, occur in about 1 in 125,000 patients.
Complete laboratory blood assessments may be performed every 2 weeks for
the first 2 months of treatment and quarterly after that, but the FDA has
revised the package insert for carbamazepine to suggest that blood
monitoring be performed at the discretion of the physician. Patients should be
informed that fever, sore throat, rash, petechiae, bruising, or unusual bleeding
may indicate a hematologic problem and should prompt immediate
notification of a physician. This approach is probably more useful than is
frequent blood monitoring during long-term treatment. It has also been
suggested that liver and renal function tests be conducted quarterly, although
the benefit of conducting tests this frequently has been questioned. It seems
reasonable, however, to assess hematologic status, along with liver and renal
functions, whenever a routine examination of the person is being conducted.
A monitoring protocol is listed in Table 21-41.
Table 21-40
Carbamazepine in Bipolar Illness: A Brief User’s Guide
1. Start with low (200 mg) bedtime dose in depression or euthymia;
higher doses (600–800 mg/day in divided doses) in manic
inpatients.
2. All bedtime dosing is reasonable with carbamazepine extendedrelease preparation.
3. Titrate slowly to the individual’s response or side effects
threshold.
4. Hepatic enzyme CYP450 (3A4) induction and autoinduction
occur in 2–3 wk; slightly higher doses may be needed or
tolerated at that time.




<<<PAGE 2094>>>

5. Warn regarding benign rash, which occurs in 5–10% of those
taking the drug; progression to rare, severe rash is unpredictable,
so the drug should be discontinued if any rash develops.
6. Benign white blood cell count decreases occur regularly (usually
inconsequential).
7. Rarely, agranulocytosis and aplastic anemia may develop
(several per million new exposures); warn regarding appearance
of fever, sore throat, petechiae, and bleeding gums and to check
with physician to obtain an immediate complete blood cell count.
8. Use adequate birth control methods, including higher dosage
forms of estrogen (as carbamazepine lowers estrogen levels).
9. Avoid carbamazepine in pregnancy (spina bifida occurs in 0.5%;
other severe adverse outcomes occur in about 8%).
10. Some people will respond well to carbamazepine and not other
mood stabilizers (lithium) or anticonvulsants (valproic acid).
11. Combination treatment often required to maintain remission and
prevent loss of effect via tolerance.
12. Major drug interactions associated with increases in
carbamazepine and potential toxicity from 3A4 enzyme inhibition
include calcium channel blockers (isradipine and verapamil);
erythromycin and related macrolide antibiotics; and valproate.
Carbamazepine treatment should be discontinued, and a consult with a
hematologist should be obtained, if the following laboratory values are found:
total WBC count below 3,000/mm3, erythrocytes below 4.0 × 106/mm3,
neutrophils below 1,500/mm3, hematocrit less than 32 percent, hemoglobin
less than 11 g/100 mL, platelet count below 100,000/mm3, reticulocyte count
below 0.3 percent, and a serum iron concentration below 150 mg/100 mL.
Table 21-41
Laboratory Monitoring
Psychiatric Disorders

of

Carbamazepine

for

Adult




<<<PAGE 2095>>>

Oxcarbazepine
Although structurally related to carbamazepine, the usefulness of
oxcarbazepine as a treatment for mania has not been established in controlled
trials.
Pharmacokinetics. Absorption is rapid and unaffected by food. Peak
concentrations occur after about 45 minutes. The elimination half-life of the
parent compound is 2 hours, which remains stable over long-term treatment.
The monohydroxide has a half-life of 9 hours. Most of the drug’s
anticonvulsant activity is presumed to result from this monohydroxy
derivative.
Side Effects. The most common side effects are sedation and nausea. Less
frequent side effects are cognitive impairment, ataxia, diplopia, nystagmus,
dizziness, and tremor. In contrast to carbamazepine, oxcarbazepine does not
have an increased risk of severe blood dyscrasias, so hematologic monitoring
is not necessary. The frequency of benign rash is lower than observed with
carbamazepine, and severe rashes are extremely rare. However, about 25 to
30 percent of patients who develop an allergic rash while taking
carbamazepine also develop a rash with oxcarbazepine. Oxcarbazepine is




<<<PAGE 2100>>>

double-blind, placebo-controlled trials failed to demonstrate topiramate
monotherapy efficacy in acute mania in adults.
Precautions and Adverse Reactions. The most common adverse
effects of topiramate include paresthesias, weight loss, somnolence, anorexia,
dizziness, and memory problems. Sometimes disturbances in the sense of
taste occur. In many cases, the adverse effects are mild to moderate and can
be attenuated by decreasing the dose. No deaths have been reported during an
overdose. The drug affects acid–base balance (low serum bicarbonate), which
can be associated with cardiac arrhythmias and the formation of renal calculi
in about 1.5 percent of cases. Patients taking the drug should be encouraged
to drink plenty of fluids. It is not known if the drug passes through the
placenta or is present in breast milk, and pregnant women or nursing mothers
should avoid it.
Drug Interactions. Topiramate has few drug interactions with other
anticonvulsant drugs. Topiramate may increase phenytoin concentrations up
to 25 percent and valproic acid 11 percent; it does not affect the concentration
of carbamazepine, phenobarbital (Luminal), or primidone. Topiramate
concentrations are decreased by 40 to 48 percent with concomitant
administration of carbamazepine or phenytoin. We should not combine
topiramate with other carbonic anhydrase inhibitors, as it increases the risk of
nephrolithiasis or heat-related problems (oligohidrosis and hyperthermia).
These include acetazolamide (Diamox) or dichlorphenamide (Daranide).
Laboratory Interferences. Topiramate does not interfere with any
laboratory tests.
Dosages and Clinical Guidelines. Topiramate is available as unscored
25-, 100-, and 200-mg tablets. Topiramate dosage is titrated gradually over 8
weeks to a maximum of 200 mg twice a day to reduce the risk of adverse
cognitive and sedative effects. Off-label topiramate is typically used
adjunctively, starting with 25 mg at bedtime and increasing weekly by 25 mg
as necessary and tolerated. Final doses in efforts to promote weight loss are
often between 75 and 150 mg/day at bedtime. Doses higher than 400 mg are
not associated with increased efficacy. All of the doses can be given at




<<<PAGE 2121>>>

syndrome, depends on how long a person takes the drug, what dose, how
quickly they taper it, and the half-life of the compound. Benzodiazepine
withdrawal syndrome consists of anxiety, nervousness, diaphoresis,
restlessness, irritability, fatigue, lightheadedness, tremor, insomnia, and
weakness (Table 21-44). Abrupt discontinuation of benzodiazepines,
particularly those with short half-lives, is associated with severe withdrawal
symptoms, which may include depression, paranoia, delirium, and seizures.
These severe symptoms are more likely to occur if flumazenil is used for the
rapid reversal of the benzodiazepine receptor agonist effects. Some features
of the syndrome may occur in as many as 90 percent of persons treated with
the drugs. The development of severe withdrawal syndrome is seen only in
persons who have taken high dosages for long periods. The syndrome may be
delayed for 1 or 2 weeks in persons who had been taking benzodiazepines
with long half-lives. Alprazolam seems to be significantly associated with an
immediate and severe withdrawal syndrome and should be tapered gradually.
When the medication is to be discontinued, the drug must be tapered
slowly (25 percent a week); otherwise, recurrence or rebound of symptoms is
likely. Monitoring of any withdrawal symptoms (possibly with a standardized
rating scale) and psychological support of the person are helpful in the
successful accomplishment of benzodiazepine discontinuation. Concurrent
use of carbamazepine (Tegretol) during benzodiazepine discontinuation has
been reported to permit a more rapid and better-tolerated withdrawal than
does a gradual taper alone. The dosage range of carbamazepine used to
facilitate withdrawal is 400 to 500 mg a day. Some clinicians report particular
difficulty in tapering and discontinuing alprazolam, especially in persons who
have been receiving high dosages for long periods. There have been reports
of successful discontinuation of alprazolam by switching to clonazepam,
which is then gradually withdrawn.
Table 21-44
Signs and Symptoms of Benzodiazepine Withdrawal
Anxiety

Tremor

Irritability

Depersonalization

Insomnia

Hyperesthesia


