<<<PAGE 1638>>>

assuring sufficient sleep are first-line therapies. Sometimes, if the individual
voluntarily makes very–rapid eye movements or is touched by another
person, the episode will usually terminate.
Sleep Enuresis. Treating sleep enuresis involves medication, behavioral
interventions, or both. Among medications, desmopressin acetate is the
preferred choice. Other medications used to treat sleep enuresis include
imipramine and oxybutynin chloride. Behavioral treatments, including
bladder training, using conditioning devices (bell and pad), diet modification,
and fluid restriction, have reported success when properly administered.
Other treatments include psychotherapy, motivational strategies, and
hypnotherapy.
Restless Legs Syndrome. Pharmacologically, the dopaminergic agonists
pramipexole, rotigotine, and ropinirole are FDA approved and represent the
treatment of choice. Other agents used to treat RLS include dopamine
precursors (e.g., levodopa), benzodiazepines, opiates (including prolongedrelease oxycodone–naloxone), and antiepileptic drugs (e.g., gabapentin,
pregabalin). When iron deficiency is present, or when ferritin levels are low,
iron supplementation can also be helpful. Nonpharmacologic treatment
includes avoiding alcohol or nicotine use close to bedtime, massaging the
affected parts of the legs, taking hot baths, applying hot or cold to the
affected areas, magnetic or electric stimulation therapy, and moderate
exercise.
Periodic Limb Movement Disorder Treatment. Pharmacotherapy for
PLMD associated with RLS is the same as for RLS. Clinical trials of
pharmacotherapy for other forms of PLMD are lacking. However,
benzodiazepines, especially clonazepam, reportedly improve sleep in patients
with PLMD.
Sleep-Related Bruxism. The usual treatment involves having the patient
wear an oral appliance to protect the teeth during sleep. There are two basic
types of appliances: the soft one (mouth guard) is typically used in the short
term, whereas the hard acrylic one (bite splint) is used long term and requires
regular follow-up. Relaxation, biofeedback, hypnosis, physical therapy, and




<<<PAGE 1811>>>

Complications may include distress and difficulties when confronted with
new situations that require flexibility and compromise, as well as myocardial
infarction secondary to features typical of type A personalities, such as time
urgency, hostility, and competitiveness.
Personality Change due to Another Medical Condition
Both the course and the prognosis of personality change due to a general
medical condition depend on its cause. If the disorder results from structural
damage to the brain, the disorder tends to persist. In cases of head trauma or
vascular accident, the disorder may follow a period of coma and delirium,
and it may be permanent. The personality change can evolve into dementia in
cases of brain tumors, multiple sclerosis, and Huntington disease. Personality
changes produced by chronic intoxication, medical illness, or drug therapy
(such as levodopa for parkinsonism) may reverse with appropriate treatment
of the cause. Some patients require custodial care or at least close supervision
to meet their basic needs, avoid repeated conflicts with the law, and protect
themselves and their families from the hostility of others and destitution
resulting from impulsive and ill-considered actions.

TREATMENT APPROACH
Individuals with personality disorders do not recognize that they are ill and
seldom seek help unless others (such as a spouse or parents) are insistent.
This usually happens when maladaptive behaviors create marital, family, and
career problems, or when other disorders (e.g., anxiety, depression, substance
use) or somatic symptoms (e.g., obesity, heart disease, COPD) complicate
their clinical picture. In general, patients with personality disorders require a
multifaceted treatment plan that often combines psychotherapy and
pharmacotherapy.
Combining Psychotherapy and Pharmacotherapy
Most patients with a personality disorder will require a combination of
psychotherapy and pharmacotherapy. Psychotherapy is the primary treatment,
as it promotes the maturation of character and, ultimately, the encouragement
of the patient’s capacity to develop better adaptive solutions. However,




<<<PAGE 1891>>>

Benzodiazepines
Clonazepam

Klonopin

PO 1 mg bid Akathisia, acute
dystonia

Lorazepam

Ativan

PO 1 mg tid

Buspirone

BuSpar

PO 20–40
mg qid

Tardive dyskinesia

Vitamin E

—

PO 1,200–
1,600
IU/day

Tardive dyskinesia

PO, orally; IM, intramuscularly; IV, intravenously; bid, twice a day; tid, three times a day; qid;
four times a day.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS. The differential diagnosis

includes seizures and

tardive dyskinesia.
COURSE AND PROGNOSIS. Dystonia can fluctuate spontaneously and respond

to reassurance, so the clinician gets the false impression that the movement is
hysterical or entirely under conscious control.
Table 21-4
Treatment of Neuroleptic Malignant Syndrome
Intervention

Dosing

Effectiveness

Amantadine

200–400 mg PO/day in
divided doses

Beneficial as
monotherapy or
in combination;
decrease in
death rate

Bromocriptine

2.5 mg PO bid or tid, may
increase to a total of 45
mg/day

Mortality reduced
as a single or
combined agent

Levodopa/carbidopa Levodopa 50–100 mg/day

Case reports of




<<<PAGE 1897>>>

1. The lowest possible dose of the psychiatric drug should be taken.
2. Patients should minimize caffeine consumption.
3. The psychiatric drug should be taken at bedtime to minimize the amount
of daytime tremor.
4. β-Adrenergic receptor antagonists (e.g., propranolol [Inderal]) can be
given to treat drug-induced tremors.
Other Medication-Induced Movement Disorders
NOCTURNAL MYOCLONUS. Nocturnal myoclonus consists of highly
stereotyped, abrupt contractions of specific leg muscles during sleep. Patients
lack any subjective awareness of the leg jerks. The condition may be present
in about 40 percent of persons over 65 years of age. The cause is unknown,
but it is a rare side effect of SSRIs.
The repetitive leg movements occur every 20 to 60 seconds, with
extensions of the large toe and flexion of the ankle, the knee, and the hips.
Frequent awakenings, unrefreshing sleep, and daytime sleepiness are
significant symptoms. No treatment for nocturnal myoclonus is universally
effective. Benzodiazepines, levodopa (Larodopa), quinine, and, in rare cases,
opioids may be useful.
In restless leg syndrome, persons feel deep
sensations of creeping inside the calves whenever sitting or lying down. The
dysesthesias are rarely painful but are agonizingly relentless and cause an
almost irresistible urge to move the legs; thus, this syndrome interferes with
sleep and with falling asleep. It peaks in middle age and occurs in 5 percent
of the population. The cause is unknown, but it is a rare side effect of SSRIs.
Symptoms are relieved by movement and by leg massage. The dopamine
receptor agonists ropinirole (Requip) and pramipexole (Mirapex) are
effective in treating this syndrome. Other treatments include the
benzodiazepines, levodopa, quinine, opioids, propranolol, valproate, and
carbamazepine.
RESTLESS LEG SYNDROME.

Hyperthermic Syndromes. All the medication-induced movement
disorders may be associated with hyperthermia. Table 21-6 lists the various
conditions associated with hyperthermia.




<<<PAGE 2039>>>

dilated pupils, and hyperactive deep tendon reflexes. Involuntary movements
may be present, particularly in the face and the jaw. Acidification of the urine
markedly hastens the excretion of MAOIs, and dialysis can be of some use.
Phentolamine or chlorpromazine may be useful if hypertension is a problem.
Moclobemide alone in overdosage causes relatively mild and reversible
symptoms.
Drug Interactions
The significant drug–drug interactions involving MAOIs are listed in Table
21-23. Most antidepressants, as well as precursor agents, should be avoided.
Persons should be instructed to tell any other physicians or dentists who are
treating them that they are taking an MAOI. MAOIs may potentiate the
action of CNS depressants, including alcohol and barbiturates. MAOIs should
not be coadministered with serotonergic drugs, such as SSRIs and
clomipramine (Anafranil), because this combination can trigger serotonin
syndrome. The use of lithium or tryptophan with an irreversible MAOI may
also induce serotonin syndrome. Initial symptoms of serotonin syndrome can
include tremor, hypertonicity, myoclonus, and autonomic signs, which can
then progress to hallucinosis, hyperthermia, and even death. Fatal reactions
had occurred when MAOIs were combined with meperidine (Demerol) or
fentanyl (Sublimaze).
Table 21-23
Drugs to Be Avoided during Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitor
Treatment (Partial Listing)
Never Use
Antiasthmatics
Antihypertensives (methyldopa, guanethidine, reserpine)
Buspirone
Levodopa
Opioids (especially meperidine, dextromethorphan,
propoxyphene, tramadol; morphine or codeine may be less
dangerous)
Cold, allergy, or sinus medications containing dextromethorphan




<<<PAGE 2054>>>

Eczematoid dermatitis
Seborrheic dermatitis (controlled study supports)
Gastrointestinal
Cyclic vomiting
Gastric ulcers
Pancreatic cholera
Ulcerative colitis
Respiratory
Asthma (controlled study did not support)
Cystic fibrosis
Other
Bovine spastic paresis
aAll the uses listed here do not have Food and Drug Administration(FDA)–approved labeling.

There are conflicting reports about many of these uses—some have negative findings in
controlled studies, and a few involve reports of possible adverse effects.
L-Dopa, levodopa.

Precautions and Adverse Effects
More than 80 percent of patients taking lithium experience side effects. It is
crucial to minimize the risk of adverse events through monitoring of lithium
blood levels and to use appropriate pharmacologic interventions to counteract
unwanted effects when they occur. The most common adverse effects are
summarized in Table 21-27. Patient education can play an essential role in
reducing the incidence and severity of side effects. Patients taking lithium
should be advised that changes in the body’s water and salt content can affect
the amount of lithium excreted, resulting in either increases or decreases in
lithium concentrations. Excessive sodium intake (e.g., a dramatic dietary
change) lowers lithium concentrations.
Table 21-27
Adverse Effects of Lithium
Neurologic
Benign, nontoxic: dysphoria, lack of spontaneity, slowed reaction
time, memory difficulties
Tremor: postural, occasional extrapyramidal




<<<PAGE 2213>>>

because of their mild mood-elevating properties, most notably,
trihexyphenidyl.
The most severe adverse effect associated with anticholinergic toxicity is
anticholinergic intoxication. The intoxication includes symptoms of delirium,
coma, seizures, agitation, hallucinations, severe hypotension, supraventricular
tachycardia, and peripheral manifestations (flushing, mydriasis, dry skin,
hyperthermia, and decreased bowel sounds). Treatment should begin with the
immediate discontinuation of all anticholinergic drugs. We can both diagnose
and treat anticholinergic intoxication with physostigmine (Antilirium,
Eserine), an inhibitor of anticholinesterase, 1 to 2 mg IV (1 mg every 2
minutes) or IM every 30 or 60 minutes. Because physostigmine can lead to
severe hypotension and bronchial constriction, it should be used only in
severe cases, and only when emergency cardiac monitoring and life-support
services are available.
Drug Interactions. The most common drug–drug interactions with the
anticholinergics occur when they are coadministered with psychotropics that
also have high anticholinergic activity, such as DRAs, tricyclic and
tetracyclic drugs, and MAOIs. Many other prescription drugs and over-thecounter cold preparations also induce significant anticholinergic activity. The
coadministration of those drugs can result in a life-threatening anticholinergic
intoxication syndrome. Also, anticholinergic drugs can delay gastric
emptying, thereby decreasing the absorption of drugs that are broken down in
the stomach and usually absorbed in the duodenum (e.g., levodopa
[Larodopa] and DRAs).
Laboratory Interferences. No known laboratory interferences have been
associated with anticholinergics.
Dosage and Clinical Guidelines. The six anticholinergic drugs discussed
in this chapter are available in a range of preparations (see Table 21-57).
For the treatment of neurolepticinduced parkinsonism, the equivalent of 1 to 3 mg of benztropine should be
given one to two times daily. The anticholinergic drug should be
administered for 4 to 8 weeks, and then it should be discontinued to assess
NEUROLEPTIC-INDUCED PARKINSONISM.




<<<PAGE 2221>>>

DOPAMINE RECEPTOR AGONISTS AND PRECURSORS
Dopamine agonists activate dopamine receptors in the absence of endogenous
dopamine and have been widely used to treat idiopathic Parkinson disease,
hyperprolactinemia, and certain pituitary tumors (prolactinoma). Because
dopamine stimulates the heart and increases blood flow to the liver, kidneys,
and other organs, low levels of dopamine are associated with low BP and low
cardiac input. Dopamine agonist drugs are also administered to treat shock
and congestive heart failure.
Their use in psychiatry has been limited to treat such adverse effects of
antipsychotic drugs as parkinsonism, extrapyramidal symptoms, akinesia,
focal perioral tremors, hyperprolactinemia, galactorrhea, and neuroleptic
malignant syndrome. The drugs in this class most commonly prescribed are
bromocriptine (Parlodel), levodopa (also called L-Dopa; Larodopa),
carbidopa-levodopa (Sinemet), and amantadine (Symmetrel). Amantadine is
used primarily for the treatment of medication-induced movement disorders,
such as neuroleptic-induced parkinsonism. It is also used as an antiviral agent
for the prophylaxis and treatment of influenza A infection and Cotard
syndrome, a rare neuropsychiatric disorder in which a person holds a
delusional belief that he or she is dead. There are also a few reports of
amantadine’s role in augmenting antidepressant medications in patients with
treatment-resistant depression.
New dopamine receptor agonists include ropinirole (Requip), pramipexole
(Mirapex), apomorphine (Apokyn), and pergolide (Permax). Of these drugs,
pramipexole is the most widely prescribed in psychiatry as an augmenter of
antidepressants. In 2007, pergolide was removed from the market because of
the risk of severe damage to patients’ heart valves. In 2012, the U.S. FDA
notified health care professionals about a possible increased risk of heart
failure with pramipexole. This warning was based on studies that suggested a
potential risk of heart failure; however, further review is required because of
study limitations.
Pharmacologic Actions
L-Dopa is rapidly absorbed after oral administration, and peak plasma levels

are reached after 30 to 120 minutes. The half-life of L-Dopa is 90 minutes.




<<<PAGE 2225>>>

Dosage and Clinical Guidelines
Table 21-61 lists the various dopamine receptor agonists and their
formulations. For the treatment of antipsychotic-induced parkinsonism, the
clinician should start with a 100-mg dose of levodopa three times a day,
which may be increased until the person is functionally improved. The
maximum dosage of L-Dopa is 2,000 mg a day, but most persons respond to
dosages below 1,000 mg/day. The dosage of the carbidopa component of the
L-Dopa-carbidopa formulation should total at least 75 mg a day.
The dosage of bromocriptine for mental disorders is uncertain, although it
seems prudent to begin with low dosages (1.25 mg twice daily) and to
increase the dosage gradually. Bromocriptine is usually taken with meals to
help reduce the likelihood of nausea.
The starting dosage of pramipexole is 0.125 mg three times daily, which is
increased to 0.25 mg three times daily in the second week and is increased by
0.25 mg/dose each week until therapeutic benefit or adverse effects emerge.
Persons with idiopathic Parkinson disease usually experience benefits at total
daily doses of 1.5 mg, and the maximum daily dose is 4.5 mg.
For ropinirole, the starting dosage is 0.25 mg three times daily and is
increased by 0.25 mg/dose each week to a total daily dose of 3 mg, then by
0.5 mg/dose each week to a total daily dose of 9 mg, and then by 1 mg/dose
each week to a maximum dosage of 24 mg a day until therapeutic benefit or
adverse effects emerge. The average daily dose for persons with idiopathic
Parkinson disease is about 16 mg.
The recommended subcutaneous dose of apomorphine in Parkinson
disease is 0.2 to 0.6 mL subcutaneously during acute hypomobility episodes
delivered via metered injector pen. Apomorphine can be administered three
times daily, with a maximum dose of 0.6 mL five times daily.
Table 21-61
Available Preparations of Dopamine Receptor Agonists and
Carbidopa
Generic Name

Trade
Name

Preparations

Amantadine

Symmetrel 100-mg capsule, 50-mg/5-mL




<<<PAGE 2226>>>

Bromocriptine

Parlodel

syrup (teaspoon)
2.5-, 5-mg tablets

Carbidopa

Lodosyn

25 mga

Levodopa (L-Dopa)

Larodopa

100-, 250-, 500-mg tablets

Levodopa-carbidopa
(co-careldopa)

Sinemet,
Atamet

100/10-mg, 100/25-mg, 250/25mg tablets; 100/25-,
200/50-mg extended-release
tablets

Pramipexole

Mirapex

0.125-, 0.375-, 0.75-, 1.5-, 3-, 4mg extended-release tablets

Ropinirole

Requip

0.25-, 0.5-, 1-, 2-, 5-mg tablets

aDrug only available directly through the manufacturer.

Amantadine
Amantadine is an antiviral drug used for the prophylaxis and treatment of
influenza. It was found to have antiparkinsonian properties and is now used
to treat that disorder as well as akinesias and other extrapyramidal signs,
including focal perioral tremors (rabbit syndrome).
Pharmacologic Actions. Amantadine is well absorbed from the GI tract
after oral administration, reaches peak plasma concentrations in
approximately 2 to 3 hours, has a half-life of about 12 to 18 hours, and attains
steady-state concentrations after approximately 4 to 5 days of therapy.
Amantadine is excreted unmetabolized in the urine. Amantadine plasma
concentrations can be twice as high in elderly persons as in younger adults.
Patients with renal failure accumulate amantadine in their bodies.
Amantadine augments dopaminergic neurotransmission in the CNS;
however, the precise mechanism is unknown. The mechanism may involve
dopamine release from presynaptic vesicles, blocking the reuptake of
dopamine into presynaptic nerve terminals, or an agonist effect on
postsynaptic dopamine receptors.
Therapeutic Indications. The primary indication for amantadine use in




<<<PAGE 2249>>>

movement disorders as a predictor for neuroleptic-induced extrapyramidal
symptoms. Br J Psychiatry. 2004;185:465–471.
Lieberman JA, Stroup TS, McEvoy JP, Swartz MS, Rosenheck RA. Clinical
Antipsychotic Trials of Intervention Effectiveness (CATIE) investigators.
N Engl J Med. 2005;353:1209–1223.
Liguori A. Psychopharmacology of attention: the impact of drugs in an age of
increased distractions. Exp Clin Psychopharmacol. 2013;21(5):343–344.
Lyons KE, Pahwa R. Efficacy and tolerability of levetiracetam in Parkinson
disease patients with levodopa-induced dyskinesia. Clin Neuropharmacol.
2006;29(3):
148–153.
Malizia AL. The role of emission tomography in pharmacokinetic and
pharmacodynamic studies in clinical psychopharmacology. J
Psychopharmacol. 2006;20(Suppl 4):100–107.
McGrath PJ, Stewart JW, Quitkin FM, Chen Y, Alpert JE. Predictors of
relapse in a prospective study of fluoxetine treatment of major depression.
Am J Psychiatry. 2006;163(9):1542–1548.
Meco G, Fabrizio E, Epifanio A, Morgante F, Valente M. Levetiracetam in
tardive dyskinesia. Clin Neuropharmacol. 2006;29:265.
Meyer JH, Ginovart N, Boovariwala A, Sagrati S, Hussey D. Elevated
monoamine oxidase a levels in the brain: an explanation for the
monoamine imbalance of major depression. Arch Gen Psychiatry.
2006;63:1209–1216.
Miller del D, Caroff SN, Davis SM, Rosenheck RA, McEvoy JP. Clinical
Antipsychotic Trials of Intervention Effectiveness (CATIE) investigators:
extrapyramidal side-effects of antipsychotics in a randomised trial. Br J
Psychiatry. 2008;193:279.
Moncrieff J. Magic bullets for mental disorders: the emergence of the concept
of an “antipsychotic” drug. J Hist Neurosci. 2013;22(1):30–46.
Pappa S, Dazzan P. Spontaneous movement disorders in antipsychotic-naive
patients with first-episode psychoses: a systematic review. Psychol Med.
2009;39:
1065–1076.
Poyurovsky M, Pashinian A, Weizman R, Fuchs C, Weizman A. Low-dose
mirtazapine: a new option in the treatment of antipsychotic-induced
akathisia. A randomized, double-blind, placebo- and propranolol-




<<<PAGE 2938>>>

The most famous human subject in the study of memory is H. M., a man
with intractable epilepsy, who had both his hippocampi and amygdalae
surgically removed to alleviate his condition. The epilepsy was
controlled, but he was left with a complete inability to form and recall
memories of facts. H. M.’s learning and memory skills were relatively
preserved, which led to the suggestion that declarative or factual memory
may be separate within the brain from procedural or skill-related
memory. A complementary deficit in procedural memory with
preservation of declarative memory may be seen in persons with
Parkinson disease, in whom dopaminergic neurons of the nigrostriatal
tract degenerate. Because this deficit in procedural memory can be
ameliorated with treatment with levodopa, which is thought to potentiate
dopaminergic neurotransmission in the nigrostriatal pathway, a role has
been postulated for dopamine in procedural memory. Additional case
reports have further implicated the amygdala and the afferent and efferent
fiber tracts of the hippocampus as essential to the formation of memories.
Also, lesional studies have suggested mild lateralization of hippocampal
function in which the left hippocampus is more efficient at forming
verbal memories, and the right hippocampus tends to form nonverbal
memories. After unilateral lesions in humans, however, the remaining
hippocampus may compensate to a large extent. Medical causes of
amnesia include alcoholism, seizures, migraine, drugs, vitamin
deficiencies, trauma, strokes, tumors, infections, and degenerative
diseases.
The motor system within the cortex receives directives from the
association areas. The performance of a novel act requires constant feedback
from the sensory and association areas for completion, and functional
neuroimaging studies have demonstrated widespread activation of the cortex
during unskilled acts. Memorized motor acts initially require activation of the
medial temporal lobe. With practice, however, the performance of ever-larger
segments of an act necessary to achieve a goal become encoded within
discrete areas of the premotor and parietal cortices, particularly the left
parietal cortex, with the result that a much more limited activation of the




<<<PAGE 3679>>>

Learning
concept, 1014–1015
defined, 1013
instrumental learning, 1018–1020
Pavlovian and operant learning together, 1020–1022, 1021f
Pavlovian conditioning, 1015–1018
theory, 1013–1022
Least restrictive alternative, 841
Lederberg, Marguerite S., 856
Legal issues, of psychiatry. See Forensic and legal issues
Leg cramps, sleep-related, 501
Lesch–Nyhan syndrome, 87t, 103, 155, 609
Let’s Face It! program, 128
Level of care, 825–827, 826t
Levetiracetam, 665
Levinson, Daniel, 911, 918t
Levitra. See Vardenafil
Levodopa, 598
Levomilnacipran, 635
Levorphanol, for pain management in dying patients, 861t
Levothyroxine, 607
Levoxyl. See Levothyroxine
Lewin, Kurt, 1084
Lewis, Dorothy, 584
Lewis, N. D. C., 45
Lewy body disease, 243, 243f, 243t
Lexical processing, 931
Lezak, Muriel, 50
Lhx5 gene, 945
Lhx transcription factor, 950
Libido, 1060
Lidcombe Program, 119
Lidocaine, 732
Life and death instincts, 1061
Light therapy, 514
Lima, Almeida, 740
Limb apraxia, 48


