<<<PAGE 439>>>

Nonstimulant Medications. Atomoxetine HCl is a norepinephrine uptake
inhibitor approved by the FDA for the treatment of ADHD in children age 6
years and older. The mechanism of action is not well understood, but likely
involves selective inhibition of the presynaptic norepinephrine transporter.
Atomoxetine absorbs well in the gastrointestinal tract, and it reaches maximal
plasma levels in 1 to 2 hours after ingestion. It is useful for inattention as well
as impulsivity in children and adults with ADHD. Its half-life is
approximately 5 hours and is given twice daily in most cases. The most
common side effects include diminished appetite, abdominal discomfort,
dizziness, and irritability. In some cases, there were increases in blood
pressure and heart rate. Atomoxetine is metabolized by the cytochrome P450
(CYP) 2D6 hepatic enzyme system. A small fraction of the population are
poor metabolizers of CYP 2D6–metabolized drugs, and, for those
individuals, plasma concentrations of the drug may increase as much as
fivefold for a given dose of medication. Drugs that inhibit CYP 2D6,
including fluoxetine, paroxetine, and quinidine, may lead to increased plasma
levels of this medication. Despite its short half-life, research suggests that
atomoxetine can reduce symptoms of ADHD in children during the school
day when administered once daily. Another recent study of a combination of
atomoxetine alone and combined with fluoxetine in the treatment of 127
children with ADHD and symptoms of anxiety or depression suggested that
atomoxetine alone can lead to improvements in mood and anxiety. Children
who received combined atomoxetine and fluoxetine experienced more
significant increases in blood pressure and pulse than those taking
atomoxetine only.
α-Agonists, both short-acting and the extended-release forms of clonidine
hydrochloride and guanfacine, are FDA approved for the treatment of ADHD
in children and adolescents from 6 to 7 years of age. Clonidine, a centrally
acting α2-adrenergic receptor agonist, likely exerts its effect on the prefrontal
cortex, although the mechanism of action is unknown. It is available in 0.1mg and 0.2-mg tablets, and is generally used twice daily, once in the morning
and once at night, to provide an around-the-clock effect. Clonidine is initiated
at 0.1 mg at bedtime, with incremental weekly increases of 0.1 mg. The
maximum dose recommended is 0.2 mg twice daily. The extended-release
formulation is not interchangeable with the short-acting clonidine. Because it




<<<PAGE 564>>>

Psychiatric Hospitalization
We should assess for suicidal thoughts, behaviors, and a history of suicidal
behavior in every child or adolescent with major depression. Safety is the
most immediate consideration in assessing depression in youth, that is, a
determination as to whether immediate psychiatric hospitalization is
necessary. Depressed children and adolescents who express suicidal thoughts
or behaviors most often require some extended evaluation in the safety of the
psychiatric hospital to provide maximal protection from self-destructive
impulses and behaviors.
Evidence-Based Treatment Studies
The Treatment for Adolescents with Depression Study (TADS) divided 439
adolescents between 12 and 17 years of age into three treatment groups of 12
weeks, composed of either fluoxetine alone (10 to 40 mg/day), fluoxetine
with the same dose range in combination with CBT, or CBT alone. Based on
ratings of the Children’s Depression Rating Scale-Revised (CDRS-R),
combination treatment had significantly superior response rates compared
with either treatment alone. Based on CGI scores at 12 weeks, rates of much
or very much improved were 71 percent for the combined treatment group,
60.6 percent for the fluoxetine group, 43.2 percent for the CBT alone group,
and 34.4 percent for the placebo group. At 12 weeks, combination treatment
was the optimal strategy in the treatment of adolescent depression. By the end
of 9 months of treatment, however, response rates for each group had
converged, so that response for the combination group was 86 percent,
fluoxetine group response was about 81 percent, and CBT-alone group
response rate was 81 percent. The long-term effectiveness of treatments for
adolescent depression demonstrates that for moderately ill adolescents,
fluoxetine, CBT, or the combination is efficacious. However, the addition of
CBT to fluoxetine decreased persistent suicidal ideation and potential
treatment-related emergence of suicidal ideation.
A second large multicenter randomized placebo-controlled trial, Treatment
of SSRI-Resistant Depression in Adolescents (TORDIA), included
adolescents with major depression who had not responded to a 2-month trial
with an SSRI antidepressant. The investigators in this study randomly
assigned 334 adolescents between 12 and 18 years of age to a different SSRI




<<<PAGE 633>>>

the treatment of anxiety disorders in children and adolescents.
A large, multisite investigation by the NIMH (Research Units in Pediatric
Psychopharmacology [RUPP]) confirmed the safety and efficacy of
fluvoxamine in the treatment of childhood separation anxiety disorder,
generalized anxiety disorder, and social anxiety disorder. This double-blind,
placebo-controlled study of 128 children and adolescents revealed that 76
percent of children in the group treated with fluvoxamine showed significant
improvement compared with 29 percent of those in the placebo group.
Response to medication was noticeable after only 2 weeks of treatment.
Fluvoxamine dosages ranged from 50 to 250 mg/day in children and up to
300 mg/day in adolescents. Children and adolescents with less comorbid
depressive symptoms had the best response. Youths who responded
continued fluvoxamine for 6 months, and almost all of them continued to be
responders at the 6-month mark.
Several other randomized clinical trials have also supported the efficacy of
SSRIs in the treatment of child and adolescent anxiety disorders. A
randomized, controlled trial found fluoxetine, at a dose of 20 mg/day, to be
safe and effective for children with these disorders, with minor side effects
including gastrointestinal distress, headache, and drowsiness. Also, a
randomized clinical trial for the treatment of generalized anxiety disorder in
children lends support for the efficacy of sertraline. Finally, a large industry
randomized clinical trial of paroxetine in the treatment of children with social
anxiety disorder found that paroxetine was associated with a response in 78
percent of children treated. The dose of paroxetine was 10 to 50 mg/day.
The FDA has placed a “black box” warning on antidepressants, including
all of the SSRI agents, used in the treatment of any childhood disorder,
because of concerns about increased suicidality; however, no individual
childhood anxiety study has found a statistically significant increase in
suicidal thoughts or behaviors.
Currently, we do not recommend using tricyclic drugs due to their
potentially serious cardiac adverse effects. Other agents, including buspirone
and β-adrenergic receptor antagonists such as propranolol, have been used
clinically in children with anxiety disorders, but currently, no data support
their efficacy. Diphenhydramine may be used in the short term to control
sleep disturbances in children with anxiety disorders. Open trials and one
double-blind, placebo-controlled study suggested that alprazolam, a




<<<PAGE 1248>>>

headaches,
somnolence,
agitation,
insomnia,
sweating, tremor,
anorexia,
dizziness,
constipation
Paroxetine

20–60

Nausea, diarrhea,
dry mouth,
headaches,
somnolence,
insomnia,
sweating,
asthenia, male
sexual
dysfunction,
dizziness

None

Sertraline

50–200

Nausea, diarrhea,
dry mouth,
headaches,
somnolence,
insomnia,
fatigue, tremor,
male sexual
dysfunction,
dizziness

None

75–375

Headaches,
Nausea
somnolence, dry
mouth,
dizziness,
nervousness,
insomnia,

SNRI
Venlafaxine




<<<PAGE 1975>>>

treating depression. However, some are approved by the U.S. FDA for
multiple indications, such as major depression, OCD, PTSD, PMDD, panic
disorder, and social phobia (social anxiety disorder) (Table 21-15). Note that
fluvoxamine is not FDA approved as an antidepressant, a fact that is due to a
marketing decision. It is considered an antidepressant in other countries.
Although all SSRIs are equally effective, there are meaningful differences
in pharmacodynamics, pharmacokinetics, and side effects, differences that
might affect clinical responses among individual patients. This would explain
why some patients have better clinical responses to a particular SSRI than
another. The SSRIs have proven more problematic in terms of some side
effects than the original clinical trials suggested. Quality-of-life–associated
adverse effects such as nausea, sexual dysfunction, and weight gain
sometimes mitigate the therapeutic benefits of the SSRIs. There can also be
distressing withdrawal symptoms when SSRIs are stopped abruptly. This
withdrawal is especially true with paroxetine but also occurs when other
SSRIs with short half-lives are stopped.
Pharmacologic Actions
Pharmacokinetics. A significant difference among the SSRIs is their
broad range of serum half-lives. Fluoxetine has the most prolonged half-life:
4 to 6 days; its active metabolite has a half-life of 7 to 9 days. The half-life of
sertraline is 26 hours, and its less active metabolite has a half-life of 3 to 5
days. The half-lives of the other three, which do not have metabolites with
significant pharmacologic activity, are 35 hours for citalopram, 27 to 32
hours for escitalopram, 21 hours for paroxetine, and 15 hours for
fluvoxamine. As a rule, the SSRIs are well absorbed after oral administration
and have their peak effects in the range of 3 to 8 hours. Absorption of
sertraline may be slightly enhanced by food.
There are also differences in plasma protein–binding percentages among
the SSRIs, with sertraline, fluoxetine, and paroxetine being the most highly
bound and escitalopram being the least bound.
All SSRIs are metabolized in the liver by the CYP450 enzymes. Because
the SSRIs have such a broad therapeutic index, other drugs rarely produce
problematic increases in SSRI concentrations. The most critical drug–drug
interactions involving the SSRIs occur as a result of the SSRIs inhibiting the




<<<PAGE 1976>>>

metabolism of the coadministered medication. Each of the SSRIs possesses a
potential for slowing or blocking the metabolism of many drugs (Table 2116). Fluvoxamine is the most problematic of the drugs in this respect. It has a
marked effect on several of the CYP enzymes. Examples of clinically
significant interactions include fluvoxamine and theophylline (Slo-Bid, TheoDur) through CYP1A2 interaction, fluvoxamine and clozapine (Clozaril)
through CYP1A2 inhibition; and fluvoxamine with alprazolam (Xanax) or
clonazepam (Klonopin) through CYP3A4 inhibition. Fluoxetine and
paroxetine also possess significant effects on the CYP2D6 isozyme, which
may interfere with the efficacy of opiate analogs, such as codeine and
hydrocodone, by blocking the conversion of these agents to their active form.
Thus, coadministration of fluoxetine and paroxetine with an opiate interferes
with its analgesic effects. Sertraline, citalopram, and escitalopram are least
likely to complicate treatment because of interactions.
The pharmacokinetics of vilazodone (5 to 80 mg) is dose-proportional.
Steady-state plasma levels are achieved in about 3 days. The elimination of
vilazodone is primarily by hepatic metabolism with a terminal half-life of
approximately 25 hours.
Pharmacodynamics. The SSRIs are believed to exert their therapeutic
effects through serotonin reuptake inhibition. They derive their name because
they have little effect on the reuptake of norepinephrine or dopamine. Often,
adequate clinical activity and saturation of the 5-HT transporters are achieved
at starting dosages. As a rule, higher dosages do not increase antidepressant
efficacy but may increase the risk of adverse effects.
Table 21-16
CYP450 Inhibitory Potential of Commonly Prescribed
Antidepressants




<<<PAGE 1980>>>

may be at a slight risk of developing pulmonary hypertension. Data about the
risk of this side effect are inconclusive, but it is estimated to involve 1 to 2
babies for 1,000 births. Paroxetine should be avoided during pregnancy.
The FDA classified paroxetine as a pregnancy Category D medication in
the former FDA classification system. In 2005, the FDA issued an alert that
paroxetine increases the risk of congenital disabilities, particularly heart
defects, when women take it during the first 3 months of pregnancy.
Paroxetine should usually not be taken during pregnancy, but for some
women who have already been taking paroxetine, the benefits of continuing
paroxetine may be greater than the potential risk to the baby. Women taking
paroxetine who are pregnant, think they may be pregnant, or plan to become
pregnant should talk to their physicians about the potential risks of taking
paroxetine during pregnancy.
The FDA alert was based on the findings of studies that showed that
women who took paroxetine during the first 3 months of pregnancy were
about one-and-a-half to two times as likely to have a baby with a heart defect
as women who received other antidepressants or women in the general
population. Most of the heart defects in these studies were not lifethreatening and happened mainly in the inside walls of the heart muscle,
where repairs can be made if needed (atrial and ventricular septal defects).
Sometimes these septal defects resolve without treatment. In one of the
studies, the risk of heart defects in babies whose mothers had taken
paroxetine early in pregnancy was 2 percent, compared with a 1 percent risk
in the whole population. In the other study, the risk of heart defects in babies
whose mothers had taken paroxetine in the first 3 months of pregnancy was
1.5 percent, compared with 1 percent in babies whose mothers had taken
other antidepressants in the first 3 months of pregnancy. This study also
showed that women who took paroxetine in the first 3 months of pregnancy
were about twice as likely to have a baby with any congenital disability as
women who took other antidepressants.
Minimal amounts of SSRIs are found in breast milk, and no harmful
effects have been found in breastfed babies. Concentrations of sertraline and
escitalopram are exceptionally low in breast milk. However, in some cases,
reported concentrations might be higher than average. No decision regarding
the use of an SSRI is risk-free. It is thus essential to document that
communication of potential risks to the patient has taken place.




<<<PAGE 1983>>>

POSTTRAUMATIC STRESS DISORDER. Pharmacotherapy for PTSD must target

specific symptoms in four clusters: reexperiencing, avoidance, negative
changes in mood and thinking, and arousal. For long-term treatment, SSRIs
appear to have a broader spectrum of therapeutic effects on specific PTSD
symptom clusters than do TCAs and MAOIs. Benzodiazepine augmentation
is useful in the acute symptomatic state. The SSRIs are associated with
marked improvement of both intrusive and avoidant symptoms.
GENERALIZED ANXIETY DISORDER. The SSRIs may be useful for the treatment

of specific phobias, generalized anxiety disorder (GAD), and separation
anxiety disorder. A thorough, individualized evaluation is the first approach,
with particular attention to identifying conditions amenable to drug therapy.
Also, cognitive-behavioral or other psychotherapies can be added for greater
efficacy.
Bulimia Nervosa and Other Eating Disorders. Fluoxetine is indicated
for the treatment of bulimia, which is best done in the context of
psychotherapy. Dosages of 60 mg a day are significantly more effective than
20 mg a day. In several well-controlled studies, fluoxetine in dosages of 60
mg a day was superior to placebo in reducing binge eating and induced
vomiting. Some experts recommend an initial course of cognitive-behavioral
therapy alone. If there is no response in 3 to 6 weeks, then fluoxetine
administration is added. The appropriate duration of treatment with fluoxetine
and psychotherapy has not been determined.
Fluvoxamine was not effective at a statistically significant level in one
double-blind, placebo-controlled trial for inpatients with bulimia.
Fluoxetine has been used in inpatient treatment of
anorexia nervosa to attempt to control comorbid mood disturbances and
obsessive-compulsive symptoms. However, at least two careful studies, one
of 7 months’ and one of 24 months’ duration, failed to find that fluoxetine
affected the overall outcome and the maintenance of weight. Effective
treatments for anorexia include cognitive-behavioral, interpersonal,
psychodynamic, and family therapies in addition to a trial with SSRIs.
ANOREXIA NERVOSA.

OBESITY.

Fluoxetine, in combination with a behavioral program, is only




<<<PAGE 1985>>>

spectrum disorders. Fluoxetine has been reported to be useful for features of
autism in children, adolescents, and adults.
Precautions and Adverse Reactions. SSRI side effects need to be
considered in terms of their onset, duration, and severity. For example,
nausea and jitteriness are early, generally mild, and time-limited side effects.
Although SSRIs share similar side effect profiles, individual drugs in this
class may cause a higher rate or carry a more severe risk of specific side
effects depending on the patient.
Sexual Dysfunction. All SSRIs cause sexual dysfunction, and it is the
most common adverse effect of SSRIs associated with long-term treatment. It
has an estimated incidence of between 50 and 80 percent. The most common
complaints are anorgasmia, inhibited orgasm, and decreased libido. Some
studies suggest that sexual dysfunction is dose-related, but this has not been
established. Unlike most of the other adverse effects of SSRIs, sexual
inhibition rarely resolves in the first few weeks of use but usually continues
as long as the drug is taken. In some cases, there may be an improvement
over time.
Strategies to counteract SSRI-induced sexual dysfunction are numerous,
and none has been proven to be very useful. Some reports suggest decreasing
the dosage or adding bupropion (Wellbutrin) or amphetamine. Reports have
described successful treatment of SSRI-induced sexual dysfunction with
agents such as sildenafil (Viagra), which are used to treat erectile
dysfunction. Ultimately, patients may need to be switched to antidepressants
that do not interfere with sexual functioning, drugs such as mirtazapine or
bupropion.
Gastrointestinal Adverse Effects. GI side effects are widespread and
are mediated mainly through effects on the serotonin 5-HT3 receptor. The
most frequent GI complaints are nausea, diarrhea, anorexia, vomiting,
flatulence, and dyspepsia. Sertraline and fluvoxamine produce the most
intense GI symptoms. Delayed-release paroxetine, compared with the
immediate-release preparation of paroxetine, has less intense GI side effects
during the first week of treatment. However, paroxetine, because of its
anticholinergic activity, frequently causes constipation. Nausea and loose




<<<PAGE 1988>>>

only one percentage point higher than the placebo rate. Fluoxetine is the most
likely to cause headaches. On the other hand, all SSRIs are effective
prophylaxis against both migraine and tension-type headaches in many
persons.
Central Nervous System Adverse Effects
ANXIETY. Fluoxetine may cause anxiety, particularly in the first few weeks of
treatment. However, these initial effects usually give way to an overall
reduction in anxiety after a few weeks. Increased anxiety is caused
considerably less frequently by paroxetine and escitalopram, which may be
better choices if sedation is desired, as in mixed anxiety and depressive
disorders.
The primary effect SSRIs exert in the area of
insomnia and sedation is improved sleep resulting from the treatment of
depression and anxiety. However, as many as 25 percent of persons taking
SSRIs note trouble sleeping, excessive somnolence, or overwhelming fatigue.
Fluoxetine is the most likely to cause insomnia, for which reason it is often
taken in the morning. Sertraline and fluvoxamine are about equally likely to
cause insomnia as somnolence, and citalopram and especially paroxetine
often cause somnolence. Escitalopram is more likely to interfere with sleep
than its isomer, citalopram. Some persons benefit from taking their SSRI
dose before going to bed, but others prefer to take it the morning. SSRIinduced insomnia can be treated with benzodiazepines, trazodone (Desyrel)
(clinicians must explain the risk of priapism), or other sedating medicines.
Significant SSRI-induced somnolence often requires switching to the use of
another SSRI or bupropion.
INSOMNIA AND SEDATION.

OTHER SLEEP EFFECTS. Many persons taking SSRIs report recalling extremely

vivid dreams or nightmares. They describe sleep as “busy.” Other sleep
effects of the SSRIs include bruxism, restless legs, nocturnal myoclonus, and
sweating.
Emotional blunting is a largely overlooked but
frequent side effect associated with chronic SSRI use. Patients report an
EMOTIONAL BLUNTING.




<<<PAGE 1991>>>

Sweating. Some patients experience sweating while being treated with
SSRIs. This sweating is independent of the temperature in the environment.
Nocturnal sweating may drench bed sheets and require a change of
nightclothes. Terazosin (Hytrin), 1 or 2 mg/day, is often dramatically
effective in counteracting sweating.
Overdose. The adverse reactions associated with overdose of vilazodone at
doses of 200 to 280 mg, as observed in clinical trials, included serotonin
syndrome, lethargy, restlessness, hallucinations, and disorientation.
Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitor Withdrawal. The abrupt
discontinuance of SSRI use, especially one with a shorter half-life such as
paroxetine or fluvoxamine, has been associated with a withdrawal syndrome
that may include dizziness, weakness, nausea, headache, rebound depression,
anxiety, insomnia, poor concentration, upper respiratory symptoms,
paresthesias, and migraine-like symptoms. It usually does not appear until
after at least 6 weeks of treatment and usually resolves spontaneously in 3
weeks. Persons who experienced transient adverse effects in the first weeks
of taking an SSRI are more likely to experience discontinuation symptoms.
Fluoxetine is the SSRI least likely to be associated with this syndrome
because the half-life of its metabolite is more than 1 week, and it effectively
tapers itself. Fluoxetine has therefore been used in some cases to treat the
discontinuation syndrome caused by the termination of other SSRIs.
Nevertheless, a delayed and attenuated withdrawal syndrome occurs with
fluoxetine as well.
Drug Interactions
The SSRIs do not interfere with most other drugs. A serotonin syndrome
(Table 21-17) can develop with concurrent administration of MAOIs, Ltryptophan, lithium, or other antidepressants that inhibit the reuptake of
serotonin. Fluoxetine, sertraline, and paroxetine can raise plasma
concentrations of TCAs, which can cause clinical toxicity. Several potential
pharmacokinetic interactions have been described based on in vitro analyses
of the CYP enzymes, but clinically relevant interactions are rare. SSRIs that
inhibit CYP2D6 may interfere with the analgesic effects of hydrocodone and
oxycodone. These drugs can also reduce the effectiveness of tamoxifen




<<<PAGE 1992>>>

(Nolvadex, Soltamox). The combined use of SSRIs and NSAIDs increases
the risk of gastric bleeding.
Table 21-17
Serotonin Syndrome Symptoms
Diarrhea

Myoclonus

Diaphoresis

Hyperactive reflexes

Tremor

Disorientation

Ataxia

Lability of mood

The SSRIs, particularly fluvoxamine, should not be used with clozapine
because it raises clozapine concentrations, increasing the risk of seizure. The
SSRIs may increase the duration and severity of zolpidem (Ambien)-induced
side effects, including hallucinations.
Fluoxetine. Fluoxetine can be administered with tricyclic drugs, but the
clinician should use low dosages of the tricyclic drug. Because the hepatic
enzyme CYP2D6 metabolizes it, fluoxetine may interfere with the
metabolism of other drugs in the 7 percent of the population who have an
inefficient isoform of this enzyme, the so-called poor metabolizers.
Fluoxetine may slow down the metabolism of carbamazepine (Tegretol),
antineoplastic agents, diazepam (Valium), and phenytoin (Dilantin). Drug
interactions have been described for fluoxetine that may affect the plasma
levels of benzodiazepines, antipsychotics, and lithium. Fluoxetine and other
SSRIs may interact with warfarin (Coumadin), increasing the risk of bleeding
and bruising.
Sertraline. Sertraline may displace warfarin from plasma proteins and may
increase the prothrombin time. The drug interaction data on sertraline support
a generally similar profile to that of fluoxetine, although sertraline does not
interact as strongly with the CYP2D6 enzyme.
Paroxetine. Paroxetine has a higher risk for drug interactions than does
either fluoxetine or sertraline because it is a more potent inhibitor of the




<<<PAGE 1993>>>

CYP2D6 enzyme. Cimetidine can increase the concentration of sertraline and
paroxetine, and phenobarbital (Luminal) and phenytoin can decrease the
concentration of paroxetine. Because of the potential for interference with the
CYP2D6 enzyme, the coadministration of paroxetine with other
antidepressants, phenothiazines, and antiarrhythmic drugs should be
undertaken with caution. Paroxetine may increase the anticoagulant effect of
warfarin. Coadministration of paroxetine and tramadol may precipitate
serotonin syndrome in elderly persons.
Fluvoxamine. Among the SSRIs, fluvoxamine appears to present the most
risk for drug–drug interactions. Fluvoxamine is metabolized by the enzyme
CYP3A4, which may be inhibited by ketoconazole (Nizoral). Fluvoxamine
may increase the half-life of alprazolam, triazolam (Halcion), and diazepam,
and it should not be coadministered with these agents. Fluvoxamine may
increase theophylline levels threefold and warfarin levels twofold, with
significant clinical consequences; thus, the serum levels of the latter drugs
should be closely monitored, and the doses adjusted accordingly.
Fluvoxamine raises concentrations and may increase the activity of clozapine,
carbamazepine, methadone (Dolophine, Methadose), propranolol (Inderal),
and diltiazem (Cardizem). Fluvoxamine has no significant interactions with
lorazepam (Ativan) or digoxin (Lanoxin).
Citalopram. Citalopram is not a potent inhibitor of any CYP enzymes.
Concurrent administration of cimetidine increases concentrations of
citalopram by about 40 percent. Citalopram does not significantly affect the
metabolism of, nor is its metabolism significantly affected by, digoxin,
lithium, warfarin, carbamazepine, or imipramine (Tofranil). Citalopram
increases the plasma concentrations of metoprolol (Lopressor) twofold, but
this usually does not affect BP or heart rate. Data on coadministration of
citalopram and potent inhibitors of CYP3A4 or CYP2D6 are not available.
Escitalopram. Escitalopram is a moderate inhibitor of CYP2D6 and has
been shown to raise desipramine (Norpramin) and metoprolol concentrations
significantly.
Vilazodone. Vilazodone dose should be reduced to 20 mg when




<<<PAGE 1994>>>

coadministered with CYP3A4 potent inhibitors. Concomitant use with
inducers of CYP3A4 can result in inadequate drug concentrations and may
diminish effectiveness. The effect of CYP3A4 inducers on the systemic
exposure of vilazodone has not been evaluated.
Laboratory Interferences
In general, the SSRIs do not interfere with any laboratory tests. There have
been some reports of false-positive urine toxicology for benzodiazepines in
patients taking sertraline; if this is suspected, additional confirmation can be
sought via gas chromatography-mass spectrometry.
Dosage and Clinical Guidelines
Fluoxetine. Fluoxetine is available in 10- and 20-mg capsules, in a scored
10-mg tablet, as a 90-mg enteric-coated capsule for once-weekly
administration, and as an oral concentrate (20 mg/5 mL). Fluoxetine is also
marketed as Sarafem for PMDD. For depression, the initial dosage is usually
10 or 20 mg orally each day, usually given in the morning, because insomnia
is a potential adverse effect of the drug. Fluoxetine should be taken with food
to minimize possible nausea. The long half-lives of the drug and its
metabolite contribute to 4 weeks to reach steady-state concentrations. Twenty
milligrams is often as effective as higher doses for treating depression. The
maximum dosage recommended by the manufacturer is 80 mg a day. To
minimize the early side effects of anxiety and restlessness, some clinicians
initiate fluoxetine use at 5 to 10 mg a day, either with the scored 10-mg tablet
or by using the liquid preparation. Alternatively, because of the long half-life
of fluoxetine, its use can be initiated with an every-other-day administration
schedule. The dosage of fluoxetine (and other SSRIs) that is effective in other
indications may differ from the dosage generally used for depression.
Sertraline. Sertraline is available in scored 25-, 50-, and 100-mg tablets. For
the initial treatment of depression, sertraline use should be initiated with a
dosage of 50 mg once daily. To limit the GI effects, some clinicians begin at
25 mg a day and increase to 50 mg a day after 3 weeks. Patients who do not
respond after 1 to 3 weeks may benefit from dosage increases of 50 mg every
week up to a maximum of 200 mg given once daily. Sertraline can be




<<<PAGE 1995>>>

administered in the morning or in the evening. Administration after eating
may reduce the GI adverse effects. Sertraline oral concentrate (1 mL = 20
mg) has 12 percent alcohol content and must be diluted before use. When
used to treat panic disorder, sertraline should be initiated at 25 mg to reduce
the risk of provoking a panic attack.
Paroxetine. Immediate-release paroxetine is available in scored 20-mg
tablets; in unscored 10-, 30-, and 40-mg tablets; and as an orange-flavored
10-mg/5-mL oral suspension. Paroxetine use for the treatment of depression
is usually initiated at a dosage of 10 or 20 mg a day. An increase in the
dosage should be considered when an adequate response is not seen in 1 to 3
weeks. At that point, the clinician can initiate upward dose titration in 10-mg
increments at weekly intervals to a maximum of 50 mg a day. Persons who
experience GI upset may benefit from taking the drug with food. Paroxetine
can be taken initially as a single daily dose in the evening; higher dosages
may be divided into two doses per day.
A delayed-release formulation of paroxetine, paroxetine CR, is available in
12.5-, 25-, and 37.5-mg tablets. The starting dosages of paroxetine CR are 25
mg/day for depression and 12.5 mg/day for panic disorder.
Paroxetine is the SSRI most likely to produce a discontinuation syndrome,
because plasma concentrations decrease rapidly in the absence of continuous
dosing. Paroxetine use should be tapered gradually to limit the symptoms of
abrupt discontinuation, with dosage reductions every 2 to 3 weeks.
Fluvoxamine. Fluvoxamine is the only SSRI not approved by the FDA as
an antidepressant. It is indicated for OCD. It is available in unscored 25-mg
tablets and scored 50- and 100-mg tablets. The effective daily dosage range is
50 to 300 mg a day. A usual starting dosage is 50 mg once a day at bedtime
for the first week, after which the dosage can be adjusted according to the
adverse effects and clinical response. Dosages above 100 mg a day may be
divided into twice-daily dosing. A temporary dosage reduction or slower
upward titration may be necessary if nausea develops over the first 2 weeks
of therapy. Although fluvoxamine can also be administered as a single
evening dose to minimize its adverse effects, its short half-life may lead to
interdose withdrawal. An extended-release formulation is available in 100and 150-mg dose strengths. All fluvoxamine formulations should be




<<<PAGE 1997>>>

Loss of Efficacy. Some patients report a diminished response or total loss
of response to SSRIs with recurrence of depressive symptoms while
remaining on a full dose of medication. The exact mechanism of this socalled “poop-out” is unknown, but the phenomenon is genuine. Potential
remedies for the attenuation of the response to SSRIs include increasing or
decreasing the dosage, tapering drug use, and then rechallenging with the
same medication, switching to another SSRI or non-SSRI antidepressant, and
augmenting with bupropion or another augmentation agent.
Vortioxetine (Trintellix). Vortioxetine works mainly as an inhibitor of
serotonin (5-HT) reuptake, but it has a more complex pharmacologic profile
than other SSRIs. It also acts as an agonist at 5-HT1A receptors, a partial
agonist at 5-HT1B receptors, and an antagonist at 5-HT3, 5-HT1D, and 5-HT7
receptors. The contribution of each of these activities to the drug’s
antidepressant effect has not been established, but it is the only compound
with this combination of pharmacodynamic actions.
Side effects seen during the trials include, but are not limited to, nausea,
constipation, and vomiting.
The recommended starting dose is 10 mg administered orally once daily
without regard to meals. The dose should then be increased to 20 mg/day, as
tolerated. A dose of 5 mg/day should be considered for patients who do not
tolerate higher doses.
The maximum recommended dose of vortioxetine is 10 mg/day in known
CYP2D6 poor metabolizers. Reduction of the dose of vortioxetine by onehalf is suggested when patients are receiving a CYP2D6 potent inhibitor
(e.g., bupropion, fluoxetine, paroxetine, or quinidine) concomitantly. The
dose should be increased to the original dose of vortioxetine in patients who
stop taking CYP inducers (e.g., rifampin, carbamazepine, or phenytoin). This
adjustment is especially essential when a potent CYP inducer is
coadministered for greater than 14 days. The maximum recommended dose
should not exceed three times the original dose. The dose of vortioxetine
should be reduced to the original level within 14 days when the inducer is
discontinued.
Although vortioxetine can be abruptly discontinued, in placebo-controlled
trials, patients experienced transient adverse reactions such as headache and




<<<PAGE 2003>>>

Pharmacologic Actions. Duloxetine is formulated as a delayed-release
capsule to reduce the risk of severe nausea associated with the drug. It is well
absorbed, but there is a 2-hour delay before absorption begins. Peak plasma
concentrations occur 6 hours after ingestion. Food delays the time to achieve
maximum concentrations from 6 to 10 hours and reduces the extent of
absorption by about 10 percent. Duloxetine has an elimination half-life of
about 12 hours (range, 8 to 17 hours). Steady-state plasma concentrations
occur after 3 days. Duloxetine’s elimination is mainly through the isozymes
CYP2D6 and CYP1A2. Duloxetine undergoes extensive hepatic metabolism
to numerous metabolites. About 70 percent of the drug appears in the urine as
metabolites, and about 20 percent is excreted in the feces. Duloxetine is 90
percent protein-bound.
Therapeutic Indications
DEPRESSION. In contrast to venlafaxine, a small number of studies have
compared duloxetine with the SSRIs. Although these studies are suggestive
of some advantage in efficacy, their findings are limited by the use of fixed,
low starting doses of paroxetine and fluoxetine, but dosages of duloxetine in
some studies were as high as 120 mg/day. Any inferences on whether
duloxetine is superior to the SSRIs in any aspect of treatment for depression
thus await more evidence from adequately designed trials.
NEUROPATHIC PAIN

ASSOCIATED

WITH

DIABETES

AND

STRESS

URINARY

INCONTINENCE. Duloxetine is the first drug to be approved by the FDA as a

treatment for neuropathic pain associated with diabetes. Its pain effects have
not been compared with other agents, such as venlafaxine and the TCAs.
Duloxetine is currently awaiting approval as a treatment for stress urinary
incontinence, the inability to voluntarily control bladder voiding, which is the
most frequent type of incontinence in women. The action of duloxetine in the
treatment of stress urinary incontinence is associated with its effects in the
sacral spinal cord, which in turn increases the activity of the striated urethral
sphincter. Duloxetine is marketed under the name Yentreve for this indication
which has not been approved for this indication in the United States but is
available in the European Union and other countries.




<<<PAGE 2004>>>

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS. The most common adverse reactions

are nausea, dry mouth, dizziness, constipation, fatigue, decreased appetite,
anorexia, somnolence, and increased sweating. Nausea was the most common
side effect that led to treatment discontinuation in clinical trials. The true
incidence of sexual dysfunction is unknown; the long-term effects on body
weight are also unknown. In clinical trials, treatment with duloxetine was
associated with mean increases in BP averaging 2 mm Hg systolic and 0.5
mm Hg diastolic versus placebo. No studies have compared the BP effects of
venlafaxine and duloxetine at equivalent therapeutic doses.
Close monitoring is suggested when using duloxetine in patients who have
or are at risk for diabetes. Duloxetine has been shown to increase blood sugar
and hemoglobin A1C levels during long-term treatment.
Patients with substantial alcohol use should not be treated with duloxetine
because of possible hepatic effects. It also should not be prescribed for
patients with hepatic insufficiency and end-stage renal disease or patients
with uncontrolled narrow-angle glaucoma.
Abrupt discontinuation of duloxetine should be avoided because it may
produce a discontinuation syndrome similar to that of venlafaxine. A gradual
dose reduction is recommended.
Clinicians should avoid the use of duloxetine by pregnant and nursing
women unless the potential benefits justify the potential risks.
Drug Interactions. Duloxetine is a moderate inhibitor of CYP450
enzymes.
Laboratory Interferences. Data are not currently available on laboratory
interferences with duloxetine.
Dosage and Administration. Duloxetine is available in 20-, 30-, and 60mg tablets. The recommended therapeutic and maximum dosage is 60
mg/day. The 20- and 30-mg doses are useful for either initial therapy or for
twice-daily use as strategies to reduce side effects. In clinical trials, dosages
of up to 120 mg/day were studied, but no consistent advantage in efficacy
was noted at doses higher than 60 mg/day. Duloxetine thus does not appear to
demonstrate a dosage–response curve. However, there were difficulties in
tolerability with single doses above 60 mg. Accordingly, when dosages of 80




<<<PAGE 2163>>>

inhibition of the presynaptic norepinephrine transporter. It is well absorbed
after oral administration and is minimally affected by food. High-fat meals
may decrease the rate but not the extent of absorption. Maximum plasma
concentrations are reached after approximately 1 to 2 hours. At therapeutic
concentrations, 98 percent of atomoxetine in plasma is bound to protein,
mainly albumin. Atomoxetine has a half-life of approximately 5 hours and is
metabolized principally by the CYP2D6 pathway. Poor metabolizers of this
compound reach a fivefold higher area under the curve and fivefold higher
peak plasma concentration than normal or extensive metabolizers. This
variation is critical to consider in patients receiving medications that inhibit
the CYP2D6 enzyme. For example, the antidepressant-like pharmacology of
atomoxetine has led to its use as an add-on to SSRIs or other antidepressants.
Drugs such as fluoxetine (Prozac), paroxetine (Paxil), and bupropion
(Wellbutrin) are CYP2D6 inhibitors and may raise atomoxetine levels.
Therapeutic Indications
Atomoxetine is used for the treatment of ADHD. It should be considered for
use in patients who find stimulants too activating or who experience other
intolerable side effects. Because atomoxetine has no abuse potential, it is a
reasonable choice in the treatment of patients with both ADHD and substance
abuse, patients who complain of ADHD symptoms but are suspected of
seeking stimulant drugs, and patients who are in recovery.
Atomoxetine may enhance cognition when used to treat patients with
schizophrenia. It may also be used as an alternative or add-on to
antidepressants in patients who fail to respond to standard therapies.
Precautions and Adverse Reactions
Common side effects of atomoxetine include abdominal discomfort,
decreased appetite with resulting weight loss, sexual dysfunction, dizziness,
vertigo, irritability, and mood swings. Minor increases in BP and heart rate
have also been observed. There have been cases of severe liver injury in a
small number of patients taking atomoxetine. The drug should be
discontinued in patients with jaundice (yellowing of the skin or whites of the
eyes, itching) or laboratory evidence of liver injury. Atomoxetine should not
be taken at the same time as, or within 2 weeks of taking, an MAOI or by


