<<<PAGE 634>>>

benzodiazepine, may help to control anxiety symptoms in separation anxiety
disorder. Clonazepam has been studied in open trials and may be useful in
controlling symptoms of panic and other anxiety symptoms.
Although SSRIs and CBT alone and in combination have demonstrated
efficacy in the treatment of anxiety disorders in youth, approximately 20 to
35 percent of children and adolescents with anxiety disorders do not appear
to benefit. Several novel agents may be useful, some based on their effect on
the NMDA system. For example, D-cycloserine (DCS), currently FDA
approved in the treatment of pediatric tuberculosis, is a partial receptor
agonist of the NMDA system and is hypothesized to augment the benefits of
exposure treatment for phobias. Some evidence suggests that DCS may
increase the speed of exposure interventions; however, there is no proof of
long-term gains. Riluzole is an antiglutamatergic agent that decreases
glutamatergic transmission by inhibiting glutamate release and inactivation of
sodium channels in cortical neurons and blocking GABA reuptake. Due to its
antiglutamatergic effects, riluzole may provide augmentation in the treatment
of OCD and generalized anxiety disorder. Another agent, memantine, an
NMDA receptor antagonist with FDA approval in the treatment of
Alzheimer’s disease, has been hypothesized to decrease anxiety due to its
influence on the glutamatergic system. Published case reports have provided
mixed results.
Although most childhood anxiety disorders wax and wane over time,
school refusal associated with separation anxiety disorder is a psychiatric
emergency. A comprehensive treatment plan involves the child, the parents,
and the child’s peers and school. Family interventions are critical in the
management of separation anxiety disorder, especially in children who refuse
to attend school, so that firm encouragement of school attendance is
maintained while providing appropriate support. When a return to a full
school day is overwhelming, the treatment team and school should help
arrange a program so the child can progressively increase the time spent at
school. Graded contact with an object of anxiety is a form of behavior
modification useful for any type of separation anxiety. Some severe cases of
school refusal require hospitalization. Cognitive-behavioral modalities
include exposure to feared separations and cognitive strategies, such as
coping self-statements aimed at increasing a sense of autonomy and mastery.




<<<PAGE 777>>>

from augmentation of cholinergic neurotransmission.
Donepezil is well tolerated and widely used. We rarely use tacrine because
of its potential for hepatotoxicity. Fewer clinical data are available for
rivastigmine and galantamine, which appear more likely to cause
gastrointestinal (GI) and neuropsychiatric adverse effects than does
donepezil. None of these medications prevent the progressive neuronal
degeneration of the disorder.
Memantine protects neurons from excessive amounts of glutamate, which
may be neurotoxic. Sometimes we may combine the drug with donepezil. It
appears to improve dementia sometimes.
Other Treatment Approaches. There are many drugs under development
for cognitive-enhancing activity and this is a very active area of drug
research. Novel strategies are focusing on the β-amyloid plaques and
neurofibrillary tangles associated with Alzheimer and some other
neurodegenerative disorders. In the case of amyloid plaques, attempts to
reduce their formation, aggregation and to increase their clearance are
underway, and several monoclonal and polyclonal antibody vaccines are
being tested.
Estrogen replacement therapy may reduce the risk of cognitive decline in
postmenopausal women. However the data is correlational and clinical trials
to date are largely disappointing. A variety of other interventions have been
proposed to improve cognitive outcomes in dementia, including cognitive
stimulation, music therapy, reminiscence therapy, omega 3 fish oil, statins,
ginkgo biloba, aromatherapy, or nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs;
however, all lack sufficient evidence to make any recommendation. Exercise
improves cognition in healthy adults, and there is some evidence of benefit in
dementia, particularly in the early stages.

EPIDEMIOLOGY
With the aging population, the prevalence of dementia is rising. The
prevalence of moderate to severe dementia in different population groups is
approximately 5 percent in the general population older than 65 years of age,
20 to 40 percent in the general population older than 85 years of age, 15 to 20
percent in outpatient general medical practices, and 50 percent in chronic care




<<<PAGE 1144>>>

raising the dose may be helpful. If the level is relatively high, clinicians
should consider whether side effects may be interfering with therapeutic
response.
If the patient is responding poorly, one may increase the dose above the
usual therapeutic level; however, higher than recommended doses usually do
not improve response. Changing to another drug is preferable.
As discussed earlier, clozapine is useful for patients who respond poorly to
other antipsychotics. Double-blind studies comparing clozapine with other
antipsychotics indicated that clozapine had the most evident advantage over
conventional drugs in patients with the most severe psychotic symptoms, as
well as in those who had previously responded poorly to other antipsychotics.
Researchers and clinicians have tried several adjunctive medications, most
with mixed success. These include lamotrigine, mirtazapine, donepezil, Dalanine, D-serine, estradiol, memantine, and allopurinol.
Other Somatic Treatments
Researchers have studied electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) in both acute and
chronic schizophrenia. Studies in recent-onset patients indicate that ECT is
about as effective as antipsychotic medications and more effective than
psychotherapy. Other studies suggest that supplementing antipsychotic
medications with ECT is more effective than antipsychotic medications
alone. Antipsychotic medications should be administered during and after
ECT treatment.
Some initial studies have suggested neuromodulation, using transcranial
magnetic stimulation (TMS) or transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS),
may be useful for treating hallucinations or negative symptoms.
Although we no longer consider psychosurgery to be appropriate
treatment, some research centers practice it on a limited experimental basis
for severe, intractable cases.
Psychosocial Therapy
Psychotherapy is considered an essential part of treatment for schizophrenia,
and patients who receive psychotherapy along with medications tend to have
better adherence to therapy, less negative symptoms, and better overall
functioning.




<<<PAGE 1356>>>

TREATMENT
Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder
Pharmacotherapy. Effective medications include clomipramine and
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs, which, along with
clomipramine and other serotonergic medications, are sometimes called
serotonin reuptake inhibitor [SRIs]). Head-to-head comparisons of
clomipramine and SSRIs show equal efficacy but better tolerability of the
SSRIs. In general, clinicians must use higher doses to achieve an optimal
effect. Examples are doses of 80 mg of fluoxetine or 200 mg of sertraline.
Some patients respond to even higher doses. Exceeding the recommended
doses is not, however, advisable for clomipramine or citalopram, due to
safety concerns. There is also some evidence that response to SRIs is slower
in OCD than in depression; clinicians are therefore encouraged to prescribe
an SRI for at least 12 weeks before deciding to switch agents or augment
with another psychotropic. A general rule of thumb is that we should
continue to use the dose that was required to obtain a response for at least 1
to 2 years. When discontinuing medication, there is a real risk of relapse, so
this should be done very gradually, with small adjustments made every few
months.
Patients who fail to respond to one SRI may respond to another.
The most extensive evidence base is for antipsychotics in adult OCD.
Among those, risperidone and aripiprazole are best supported as adjuncts.
Some studies have indicated that these are particularly useful in patients with
tics, but not all data are consistent. When a response to these agents occurs, it
typically happens relatively quickly (e.g., 4 weeks). When using dopamine
receptor blockers, it is crucial to monitor adverse events.
Memantine, riluzole, ketamine, lamotrigine, and N-acetylcysteine (NAC)
are other promising augmentation agents.
Psychotherapy. There is a long history of understanding OCD symptoms
from a psychodynamic perspective, but there is no rigorous evidence that a
psychodynamic approach is useful in the treatment of OCD. Instead,
empirical research on the psychotherapy of OCD has emerged from
behavioral and cognitive perspectives. Exposure and response prevention




<<<PAGE 1816>>>

(riluzole,
memantine)
Acute and severe

Mirtazapine, Novel
Psychotropics
(quetiapine,
aripiprazole,
clozapine), TCAs,
clonazepam,
valproates, lithium

Depression
Atypical
MAOIs, SSRIs,
depression/dysphoria
SNRIs,
Classical depression
Aripiprazole,
Lurasidone,
ziprasidone,
quetiapine,
Atypical
antipsychotics (as
monotherapy or
augmentation)

TCAs

Emotional lability/rapid Lithium, Lamotrigine,
cycling
Valproate, Lowerdose
antipsychotics
(olanzapine,
aripiprazole,
clozapine,
ziprasidone)

TCAs
(“catecholamine
stress”),
Standard
antidepressants
(risk of switching
to mania)

II. Behavior Dyscontrol
Aggression/impulsivity
Affective aggression
Lithium, SSRIs,
“Hot temper” with normal
Anticonvulsants,

Benzodiazepines
(disinhibition)




<<<PAGE 2196>>>

therapy trial.
3. In monotherapy trials, clinically relevant improvements were observed
beginning at doses in the range 0.05 to 0.08 mg/kg once daily. Efficacy
increased with increasing weight-adjusted dose (mg/kg). If well
tolerated, doses up to 0.12 mg/kg once daily may provide additional
benefit. Doses above 4 mg/day have not been systematically studied in
controlled clinical trials.
4. In the adjunctive trial, the majority of subjects reached optimal doses in
the 0.05 to 0.12 mg/kg/day range.
In clinical trials, there were dose-related and exposure-related risks for
several clinically significant adverse reactions (e.g., hypotension,
bradycardia, sedative events). Thus, consideration should be given to dosing
an extended-release preparation of guanfacine on a milligram-per-kilogram
basis in order to balance the exposure-related potential benefits and risks of
treatment.

21.8 Drugs Used for Cognitive
Enhancement
CHOLINESTERASE INHIBITORS
Donepezil (Aricept), rivastigmine (Exelon), and galantamine (Reminyl) are
cholinesterase inhibitors used to treat mild to moderate cognitive impairment
in dementia of the Alzheimer type. They reduce the inactivation of the
neurotransmitter acetylcholine and, thus, potentiate cholinergic
neurotransmission, which in turn produces a modest improvement in memory
and goal-directed thought. Memantine (Namenda) is not a cholinesterase
inhibitor, producing its effects through blockade of NMDA receptors. Unlike
the cholinesterase inhibitors, which are indicated for the mild to moderate
stages of Alzheimer disease, memantine is indicated for the moderate to
severe stages of the disease. Tacrine (Cognex), the first cholinesterase
inhibitor to be introduced, is no longer used because of its multiple-daily
dosing regimens, its potential for hepatotoxicity, and the consequent need for




<<<PAGE 2197>>>

frequent laboratory monitoring. Clinicians often combine a cholinesterase
inhibitor with memantine, as this combination may provide a beneficial
response compared with only cholinesterase inhibitor pharmacotherapy.
Pharmacologic Actions
Donepezil is entirely absorbed from the GI tract. Peak plasma concentrations
are reached about 3 to 4 hours after oral dosing. The half-life of donepezil is
70 hours in elderly persons, and it is taken only once daily. Steady-state
levels are achieved within about 2 weeks. The presence of stable alcoholic
cirrhosis reduces the clearance of donepezil by 20 percent. Rivastigmine
(Exelon) is rapidly and completely absorbed from the GI tract and reaches
peak plasma concentrations in 1 hour, but this is delayed by up to 90 minutes
if rivastigmine is taken with food. The half-life of rivastigmine is 1 hour, but
because it remains bound to cholinesterases, a single dose is therapeutically
active for 10 hours, and it is taken twice daily. Galantamine (Reminyl) is an
alkaloid similar to codeine and is extracted from daffodils of the plant
Galanthus nivalis. It is readily absorbed, with maximum concentrations
reached after 30 minutes to 2 hours. Food decreases the maximum
concentration by 25 percent. The elimination half-life of galantamine is
approximately 6 hours.
Tacrine (Cognex) is absorbed rapidly from the GI tract. Peak plasma
concentrations are reached about 90 minutes after oral dosing. The half-life of
tacrine is about 2 to 4 hours, thereby necessitating four-times-daily dosing.
Cholinesterase inhibitors are reversible, nonacylating inhibitors of either
acetylcholinesterase or butyrylcholinesterase, the enzymes that catabolize
choline-based esthers in the CNS. The enzyme inhibition increases synaptic
concentrations of acetylcholine, especially in the hippocampus and cerebral
cortex. Unlike tacrine, which is nonselective for all forms of
acetylcholinesterase, donepezil appears to be selectively active within the
CNS and has little activity in the periphery. Donepezil’s favorable side effect
profile appears to correlate with its lack of inhibition of cholinesterases in the
GI tract. Rivastigmine appears to have somewhat more peripheral activity
than donepezil and is thus more likely to cause GI adverse effects than is
donepezil.




<<<PAGE 2201>>>

Dosage and Clinical Guidelines. Before initiation of cholinesterase
inhibitor therapy, potentially treatable causes of dementia should be ruled
out, and the diagnosis of dementia of the Alzheimer type established.
Donepezil is available in 5- and 10-mg tablets. Treatment should be
initiated at 5 mg each night. If well tolerated and of some discernible benefit
after 4 weeks, the dosage should be increased to a maintenance dosage of 10mg each night. Donepezil absorption is unaffected by meals.
Rivastigmine is available in 1.5-, 3-, 4.5-, and 6-mg capsules. The
recommended initial dosage is 1.5 mg twice daily for a minimum of 2 weeks,
after which increases of 1.5 mg a day can be made at intervals of at least 2
weeks to a target dosage of 6 mg a day, taken in two equal dosages. If
tolerated, the dosage may be further titrated upward to a maximum of 6 mg
twice daily. The administration of rivastigmine with food can reduce the risk
of adverse GI events.
Galantamine is available in 4-, 8-, and 16-mg tablets. The suggested dose
range is 16 to 32 mg/day given twice a day. The higher dose is better
tolerated than lower doses. The initial dosage is 8 mg/day, and after a
minimum of 4 weeks, the dose can be raised. All subsequent dosage increases
should occur at 4-week intervals and should be based on tolerability.
Tacrine is available in 10-, 20-, 30-, and 40-mg capsules. Before the
initiation of tacrine treatment, a complete physical and laboratory
examination should be conducted, with particular attention to liver function
tests and baseline hematologic indexes. Treatment should be initiated at 10
mg four times a day and then raised by increments of 10 mg a dose every 6
weeks up to 160 mg a day; the person’s tolerance of each dosage is indicated
by the absence of unacceptable side effects and lack of elevation of ALT
activity. Tacrine should be given four times daily—ideally 1 hour before
meals because the absorption of tacrine is reduced by about 25 percent when
it is taken during the first 2 hours after meals. If tacrine is used, the specific
guidelines for tacrine-induced ALT listed above should be followed.

MEMANTINE
Pharmacologic Actions
Memantine is well absorbed after oral administration. It reaches peak




<<<PAGE 2202>>>

concentrations in about 3 to 7 hours. Food does not affect the absorption of
memantine. Memantine has linear pharmacokinetics over the therapeutic
dosage range and has a terminal elimination half-life of about 60 to 80 hours.
Plasma protein binding is 45 percent.
Memantine undergoes little metabolism, with the majority (57 to 82
percent) of an administered dose excreted unchanged in the urine; the
remainder is converted primarily to three polar metabolites: the N-gludantan
conjugate, 6-hydroxy memantine, and 1-nitroso-deaminated memantine.
These metabolites possess minimal NMDA receptor antagonist activity.
Memantine is a low- to moderate-affinity NMDA receptor antagonist. It is
thought that the overexcitation of NMDA receptors by the neurotransmitter
glutamate may play a role in Alzheimer disease because glutamate plays an
integral role in the neural pathways associated with learning and memory.
Excess glutamate overstimulates NMDA receptors to allow too much calcium
into nerve cells, leading to the eventual cell death observed in Alzheimer
disease. Memantine may protect cells against excess glutamate by partially
blocking NMDA receptors associated with the abnormal transmission of
glutamate while allowing for physiologic transmission associated with
normal cell functioning.
Therapeutic Indications
Memantine is the only approved therapy in the United States for moderate to
severe Alzheimer disease.
Precautions and Adverse Reactions
Memantine is safe and well tolerated. The most common adverse effects are
dizziness, headache, constipation, and confusion. The use of memantine in
patients with severe renal impairment is not recommended. In a documented
case of an overdose with up to 400 mg of memantine, the patient experienced
restlessness, psychosis, visual hallucinations, somnolence, stupor, and loss of
consciousness. The patient recovered without permanent sequelae.
Drug Interactions
In vitro studies conducted with marker substrates of CYP450 enzymes
(CYP1A2, 2A6, 2C9, 2D6, 2E1, and 3A4) showed minimal inhibition of




<<<PAGE 2203>>>

these enzymes by memantine. No pharmacokinetic interactions with drugs
metabolized by these enzymes are expected.
Because memantine is eliminated in part by tubular secretion,
coadministration of drugs that use the same renal cationic system, including
hydrochlorothiazide triamterene (Dyrenium), cimetidine (Tagamet),
ranitidine (Zantac), quinidine, and nicotine, could potentially result in altered
plasma levels of both agents. Coadministration of memantine with a
combination of hydrochlorothiazide and triamterene did not affect the
bioavailability of either memantine or triamterene, and the bioavailability of
hydrochlorothiazide decreased by 20 percent.
Urine pH is altered by diet, drugs (e.g., carbonic anhydrase inhibitors,
topiramate [Topamax], sodium bicarbonate), and the clinical state of the
patient (e.g., renal tubular acidosis or severe infections of the urinary tract).
The clearance of memantine is reduced by about 80 percent under alkaline
urine conditions at pH 8. Therefore, alterations of urine pH toward the
alkaline condition may lead to an accumulation of the drug with a possible
increase in adverse effects. Hence, memantine should be used with caution
under these conditions.
Laboratory Interferences
No laboratory interferences have been associated with the use of memantine.
Dosage and Clinical Guidelines
Memantine is available in 5- and 10-mg tablets, with a recommended starting
dose of 5 mg daily. The recommended target dose is 20 mg/day. The drug is
administered twice daily in separate doses with 5-mg increment increases
weekly depending on tolerability.
Patients with mild to moderate disease receiving memantine in
combination with a cholinesterase inhibitor have not been found to
experience significantly greater benefit in cognition or overall function than
those who receive a cholinesterase inhibitor alone.

21.9 Drugs Used to Treat Sexual




<<<PAGE 2287>>>

2006;26(Suppl 1):S37.
Weiss RD, O’malley SS, Hosking JD, Locastro JS, Swift R, COMBINE
Study Research Group. Do patients with alcohol dependence respond to
placebo? Results from the COMBINE Study. J Stud Alcohol Drugs.
2008;69(6):878.
Zarkin GA, Bray JW, Aldridge A, Mitra D, Mills MJ, Couper DJ, Cisler RA,
COMBINE Cost-Effectiveness Research Group. Cost and costeffectiveness of the COMBINE study in alcohol-dependent patients. Arch
Gen Psychiatry. 2008;65(10):1214–1221.
Drugs Used for Cognitive Enhancement
Auchus AP, Brasher HR, Salloway S, Korczyn AD, DeDeyn PP.
Galantamine treatment of vascular dementia: a randomized trial.
Neurology. 2007;69:448.
Black SE, Doody R, Li H, McRae T, Jambor KM. Donepezil preserves
cognition and global function in patients with severe Alzheimer’s disease.
Neurology. 2007;
69:459.
Cummings J, Lefevre G, Small G, Appel-Dingemanse S. Pharmacokinetic
rationale for rivastigmine patch. Neurology. 2007;69(4 Suppl 1):S10.
Droogsma E, Veeger N, van Walderveen P, Niemarkt S, van Asselt D. Effect
of treatment gaps in elderly patients with dementia treated with
cholinesterase inhibitors. Neurology. 2013;80(17):1622.
Edwards K, Royall D, Hershey L, Lichter D, Ake A. Efficacy and safety of
galantamine in patients with dementia with Lewy body: a 24-week openlabel study. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord. 2007;23:401.
Jann MW, Small GW. Cholinesterase inhibitors. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA,
Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry.
9th ed. Vol. 2. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins;
2009:3089.
Porsteinsson AP, Grossberg GT, Mintzer J, Memantine MEM MD 12 Study
Group. Memantine treatment in patients with mild to moderate
Alzheimer’s disease already receiving a cholinesterase inhibitor: a
randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Curr Alzheimer Res.
2008;5:83–89.
Qassem A, Snow V, Cross JT Jr, Forcicea MA, Hopkins R Jr, Shekelle P,




<<<PAGE 2288>>>

Adelman A, Mehr D, Schellhase K, Campos-Outcalt D, Santagoida P,
Owens DK. Current pharmacologic treatment of dementia: a clinical
practice guideline from the American College of Physicians and the
American Academy of Family Physicians. Ann Intern Med. 2008;148:370–
378.
Reisberg B, Doody R, Stoffer A, Schmidt F, Ferris S. A 24-week open label
extension study on memantine in moderate to severe Alzheimer’s disease.
Arch Neurol. 2006;63:49.
Ritchie C, Zhinchin G. Low dose, high dose, or no dose: better prescribing of
cholinesterase inhibitors for Alzheimer’s disease. Int Psychogeriatr.
2013;25(4):511–515.
Seltzer B. Donepezil: an update. Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2007;8:1011–
1023.
Wagle KC, Rowan PJ, Poon O-YI, Kunik ME, Taffet GE, Braun UK.
Initiation of cholinesterase inhibitors in an inpatient setting. Am J
Alzheimer Dis Other Demen. 2013;28(4):377–383.
Drugs Used to Treat Sexual Disorders
Chivers ML, Rosen RC. Phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitors and female
sexual response: faulty protocols or paradigms? J Sex Med. 2010;7(2 Pt
2):858–872.
Claes HI, Goldstein I, Althof SE, Berner MM, Cappelleri JC, Bushmakin
AG, Symonds T, Schnetzler G. Understanding the effects of sildenafil
treatment on erection maintenance and erection hardness. J Sex Med.
2010;7(6):2184–2191.
Hatzimouratidis K, Burnett AL, Hatzichristou D, McCullough AR, Montorsi
F, Mulhall JP. Phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitors in postprostatectomy
erectile dysfunction: a critical analysis of the basic science rationale and
clinical application. Eur Urol. 2009;55(2):334–347.
Hosain G, Latini DM, Kauth M, Goltz HH, Helmer DA. Sexual dysfunction
among male veterans returning from Iraq and Afghanistan: prevalence and
correlates. J Sex Med. 2013;10(2):516–523.
Khan AS, Sheikh Z, Khan S, Dwivedi R, Benjamin E. Viagra deafness—
Sensorineural hearing loss and phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitors.
Laryngoscope. 2011;121(5):
1049–1054.




<<<PAGE 3027>>>

robust enhancer of CBT, suggesting that pharmacologically augmenting
neural plasticity may be used to bolster psychological interventions.
Fragile X mental retardation protein (FMRP), which is deficient in
individuals with fragile X syndrome, appears to be synthesized locally within
the spine during times of NMDA receptor activation and also plays a role in
transporting specific mRNAs to the spine for translation. Notably, mice in
which the FMRP gene has been inactivated through a null mutation, as well
as patients with fragile X syndrome have fewer dendritic spines, the
preponderance of which have an immature morphology. Loss of FMRP
exaggerates responses of mGluR5, which stimulates dendritic protein
synthesis, and treatment with an mGluR5 antagonist reverses the fragile-X–
like phenotype in mice with the FMRP gene inactivated.
EXCITOTOXICITY.

In the early 1970s, it was shown that the systemic
administration of large amounts of monosodium glutamate to immature
animals resulted in the degeneration of neurons in brain regions where the
BBB was deficient.
Excitotoxicity is also implicated as a proximate cause of neuronal
degeneration in Alzheimer disease. Most evidence points to the toxic
consequences of aggregates of β-amyloid, especially β-amyloid1-42. The βamyloid fibrils depolarize neurons, resulting in loss of the Mg2+ block and
enhanced NMDA receptor sensitivity to glutamate. The fibrils also impair
glutamate transport into astrocytes, thereby increasing the extracellular
concentration of glutamate. β-Amyloid directly promotes oxidative stress
through inflammation that further contributes to neuronal vulnerability to
glutamate. Thus, several mechanisms contribute to neuronal vulnerability to
NMDA-receptor–mediated excitotoxicity in Alzheimer disease. Memantine, a
recently approved treatment for mild to moderate Alzheimer disease, is a
weak noncompetitive inhibitor of NMDA receptors. It reduces the tonic
sensitivity of NMDA receptors to excitotoxicity but does not interfere with
“phasic” neurotransmission, thereby attenuating neuronal degeneration in
Alzheimer disease.
Inhibitory Amino Acids: GABA. GABA is the major inhibitory
neurotransmitter in the brain, where it is broadly distributed and occurs in
millimolar concentrations. Given its physiologic effects and distributions, it is




<<<PAGE 3686>>>

Megacolon, 483
Megaloblastic madness, 262
Melancholia, 380
Melatonin, 514, 1003
circadian rhythms and, 1004
for insomnia, 509–510
function of, 1004
human, 1004
rhythms, 1002
seasonality and, 1003
Melatonin (N-acetyl-5-methoxytryptamine), 681
Melatonin receptor agonists, 680–681
Mellaril. See Thioridazine
Memantine
for dementia, 239
dosage and clinical guidelines, 699
drug interactions, 699
pharmacologic actions, 698–699
precautions and adverse reactions, 699
therapeutic indications, 699
Memory
anatomy of, 932–934
assessment of, 54
in MSE, 10, 11t, 13t
cortical organization of memory, 1023–1024
frontal contributions to memory, 1028
functions, assessment of, 1030–1032, 1031f
long-term, 49
older adults, 89
memory systems, 1028
new learning capacity, 1032
priming, 1027–1028
psychogenic amnesia, 1032–1033
remote memory, 1032
retrograde amnesia, 1026–1027
self-reports, 1032
short-term, 49


