<<<PAGE 567>>>

depression severity pretreatment and posttreatment using parent ratings on
the Preschool Reelings Checklist-Scale Version (PFC-S), a 20-item checklist.
Results revealed that both groups showed significant improvement, with
particular improvement in the PCIT-ED group concerning emotion
recognition, child executive functioning, and parenting stress. This pilot
study indicates that PCIT-ED is a promising novel intervention for preschool
depression that deserves further investigation.
Pharmacotherapy
Fluoxetine and escitalopram have FDA approval in the treatment of major
depression in adolescents. Three RCTs of fluoxetine in depressed children
and adolescents demonstrate its efficacy. The common side effects are similar
as for adults: headache, gastrointestinal symptoms, sedation, and insomnia.
Short-term randomized clinical trials have demonstrated the efficacy of
citalopram and sertraline compared with placebo in the treatment of major
depression in children and adolescents. Sertraline was efficacious in two
multicenter, double-blind, placebo-controlled trials of 376 children and
adolescents. The doses of sertraline ranged from 50 to 200 mg a day or
placebo. Nearly 70 percent of the subjects had a greater than 40 percent
decrease in depression rating scale scores (compared with 56 percent in the
placebo group). The most common side effects are anorexia, vomiting,
diarrhea, and agitation.
Citalopram has been demonstrated in one RCT in the United States to be
efficacious in 174 children and adolescents treated with citalopram at doses
of 20 to 40 mg a day or placebo for 8 weeks. Significantly more of the group
on citalopram showed improvement compared with placebo on the
depression rating scale (CDRS-R). A significantly increased response rate
(response defined as less than 28 on CDRS-R) of 35 percent occurred in the
citalopram group, compared with 24 percent of the placebo group. Common
side effects that emerged included headache, nausea, insomnia, rhinitis,
abdominal pain, dizziness, fatigue, and flu-like symptoms.
RCTs to date that have not shown efficacy on primary outcome measures
include those using mirtazapine and tricyclic antidepressants. A metaanalysis of SSRI trials in depressed children and adolescents found the
efficacy of SSRIs compared to placebo with an average response rate of 60




<<<PAGE 1144>>>

raising the dose may be helpful. If the level is relatively high, clinicians
should consider whether side effects may be interfering with therapeutic
response.
If the patient is responding poorly, one may increase the dose above the
usual therapeutic level; however, higher than recommended doses usually do
not improve response. Changing to another drug is preferable.
As discussed earlier, clozapine is useful for patients who respond poorly to
other antipsychotics. Double-blind studies comparing clozapine with other
antipsychotics indicated that clozapine had the most evident advantage over
conventional drugs in patients with the most severe psychotic symptoms, as
well as in those who had previously responded poorly to other antipsychotics.
Researchers and clinicians have tried several adjunctive medications, most
with mixed success. These include lamotrigine, mirtazapine, donepezil, Dalanine, D-serine, estradiol, memantine, and allopurinol.
Other Somatic Treatments
Researchers have studied electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) in both acute and
chronic schizophrenia. Studies in recent-onset patients indicate that ECT is
about as effective as antipsychotic medications and more effective than
psychotherapy. Other studies suggest that supplementing antipsychotic
medications with ECT is more effective than antipsychotic medications
alone. Antipsychotic medications should be administered during and after
ECT treatment.
Some initial studies have suggested neuromodulation, using transcranial
magnetic stimulation (TMS) or transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS),
may be useful for treating hallucinations or negative symptoms.
Although we no longer consider psychosurgery to be appropriate
treatment, some research centers practice it on a limited experimental basis
for severe, intractable cases.
Psychosocial Therapy
Psychotherapy is considered an essential part of treatment for schizophrenia,
and patients who receive psychotherapy along with medications tend to have
better adherence to therapy, less negative symptoms, and better overall
functioning.




<<<PAGE 1249>>>

sweating, male
sexual
dysfunction
Desvenlafaxine

50–100

Dry mouth,
dizziness,
nausea,
sweating

None

Duloxetine

30–120

Nausea, dry mouth, None
constipation,
insomnia, male
sexual
dysfunction

Levomilnacipran

20–80

Nausea, dry mouth, None
headaches, male
sexual
dysfunction

Other Second-Generation and Novel Antidepressants
Agomelatinea

25–50

None

None

Bupropion

150–450

Insomnia, dry
mouth, nausea

Headaches

Mirtazapine

15–60

Dry mouth,
constipation,
increased
appetite, weight
gain

Somnolence

Moclobemidea

300–600

None

None

Vilazodone

10–40

Diarrhea, nausea,
headaches

None

Vortioxetine

10–20

Nausea

None

aNot routinely available in the United States.




<<<PAGE 1252>>>

require a combination of an antidepressant and an atypical antipsychotic.
Several studies have also shown that ECT is useful for this indication—
perhaps more effective than pharmacotherapy.
For those with atypical symptom features, strong evidence exists for the
effectiveness of MAOIs. SSRIs and bupropion are also of use in atypical
depression.
COMORBID DISORDERS. The simultaneous presence of another disorder can

affect initial treatment selection. For example, the successful treatment of an
OCD associated with depressive symptoms usually results in remission of the
depression. Similarly, when panic disorder occurs with major depression,
medications with demonstrated efficacy in both conditions are preferred (e.g.,
tricyclics and SSRIs). In general, the nonmood disorder dictates the choice of
treatment in comorbid states.
Concurrent substance abuse raises the possibility of a substance-induced
mood disorder, which must be evaluated by history or by requiring
abstinence for several weeks. Abstinence often results in remission of
depressive symptoms in substance-induced mood disorders. For those with
continuing significant depressive symptoms, even with abstinence, an
independent mood disorder is diagnosed and treated.
General medical conditions are established risk factors in the development
of depression. The presence of a major depressive episode is associated with
increased morbidity or mortality of many general medical conditions (e.g.,
cardiovascular disease, diabetes, cerebrovascular disease, and cancer).
THERAPEUTIC USE OF SIDE EFFECTS. Choosing more sedating antidepressants

(such as mirtazapine or paroxetine) for more anxious, depressed patients or
more activating agents (bupropion) for more psychomotor-retarded patients is
not as helpful as one might think. For example, any short-term benefits with
paroxetine or mirtazapine on symptoms of anxiety or insomnia may become
liabilities over time. These drugs often continue to be sedating in the longer
run, which can lead to patients prematurely discontinuing medication and
increase the risk of relapse or recurrence. Some practitioners use adjunctive
medications, such as hypnotics or anxiolytics, combined with antidepressants
to provide more immediate symptom relief or to cover those side effects to
which most patients ultimately adapt.




<<<PAGE 1306>>>

recommended
MAOIs

Insufficient
evidence

Second line

Second line

RIMA-Moclobemide Insufficient
evidence

Insufficient
evidence

Second Line

Other Psychotropics Second line
—Agomelatine,
Buspirone,
Mirtazapine

Second line

Second line

Benzodiazepines

Second line

Second line

Second line

Atypical
Second line
Antipsychotics—
Quetiapine

Insufficient
evidence

Not
recommended

Anticonvulsant—
Pregabalin

Insufficient
evidence

Second line

Second line

Note: Beta-adrenergic blocking agents are recommended only for performance anxiety.
RIMA, reversible monoamine oxidase inhibitor; GAD, generalized anxiety disorder; PD, panic
disorder; SAD, social anxiety disorder.

In the case of specific phobia, psychotherapies, particularly behavioral
therapies, are the first-line choice. SSRIs may be helpful, although there are
few studies of SSRIs for this disorder.
For agoraphobia, the main goal of pharmacotherapy is to treat the panic
attacks that are usually comorbid. Early studies did not support the use of
medications for “pure” agoraphobia; however, there has been little research
since.
Psychosocial Therapies
There is strong support for a variety of psychosocial therapies for anxiety
disorders, including cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT), behavioral
therapies, and interpersonal therapy. Studies of CBT suggest it has a
substantial effect on generalized anxiety disorder, panic disorder, and social
anxiety disorder, although this evidence is tempered by concerns about




<<<PAGE 1436>>>

Electroconvulsive therapy (for refractory depression with persistent
melancholic features across all dissociative identity disorder
alters)
Mood stabilizers (more useful for PTSD and anxiety than mood
swings)
Divalproex
Lamotrigine
Oral or intramuscular benzodiazepines
Medications for sleep problems
Low-dose trazodone
Low-dose mirtazapine
Low-dose tricyclic antidepressants
Low-dose neuroleptics
Benzodiazepines (often less helpful for sleep problems in this
population)
Zolpidem
Anticholinergic agents (diphenhydramine, hydroxyzine)
Medications for self-injury, addictions
Naltrexone
Brainwashing
There are no empirical treatment studies of individuals subjected to extreme
coercion applied in the service of indoctrination into a belief system or an
attempt at identity alteration. The basic principles of phased trauma treatment
would seem to provide an organizing framework for their care, as for victims
of other forms of torture. Family and social interventions may be necessary
because of the duress and disruption accompanying the precipitating events
and the social effects of the profound changes in the patient’s attitudes,
behaviors, and beliefs, as well as sequestration from everyday events during
the period of captivity.
Ganser Syndrome
No systematic treatment studies have been conducted, given the rarity of this
condition. In most case reports, the patient has been hospitalized and
provided with a protective and supportive environment. In some instances,




<<<PAGE 1816>>>

(riluzole,
memantine)
Acute and severe

Mirtazapine, Novel
Psychotropics
(quetiapine,
aripiprazole,
clozapine), TCAs,
clonazepam,
valproates, lithium

Depression
Atypical
MAOIs, SSRIs,
depression/dysphoria
SNRIs,
Classical depression
Aripiprazole,
Lurasidone,
ziprasidone,
quetiapine,
Atypical
antipsychotics (as
monotherapy or
augmentation)

TCAs

Emotional lability/rapid Lithium, Lamotrigine,
cycling
Valproate, Lowerdose
antipsychotics
(olanzapine,
aripiprazole,
clozapine,
ziprasidone)

TCAs
(“catecholamine
stress”),
Standard
antidepressants
(risk of switching
to mania)

II. Behavior Dyscontrol
Aggression/impulsivity
Affective aggression
Lithium, SSRIs,
“Hot temper” with normal
Anticonvulsants,

Benzodiazepines
(disinhibition)




<<<PAGE 1880>>>

Thus, blockade of serotonin reuptake by SSRIs can cause nausea and sexual
dysfunction. The D2 blockade of drugs used to treat psychosis can cause
extrapyramidal side effects. Agonist action of benzodiazepine receptors can
cause ataxia and daytime sleepiness. In these cases, additional medications
are frequently used to make the primary agent better tolerated.
Time Course
Adverse effects differ in terms of their onset and duration. Some side effects
appear at the outset of treatment and then rapidly diminish. Nausea occurring
with SSRIs or venlafaxine (Effexor) and sedation occurring with mirtazapine
(Remeron) are good examples of early, time-limited side effects. Early-onset,
but persistent, side effects include a dry mouth that is associated with
noradrenergic reuptake inhibition or antimuscarinic activity. Some side
effects appear later in treatment (late-appearing side effects) and, sometimes
may be just the opposite of adverse events early in treatment. For example,
patients may typically lose weight during early treatment with SSRIs, only to
find, over time, a reversal occurs, so that they gain weight.
Similarly, early activation or agitation may be followed by constant fatigue
or apathy. Because most data about new drugs come from short-term studies,
generally 8 weeks in duration, early-onset side effects are overrepresented in
product information and descriptions of newly marketed information.
Clinicians must follow the letters to the editor sections of journals and other
sources of information to update their understanding of the real side effect
profile of a drug.
Adverse effects differ in their impact on compliance and the potential to
cause harm. Depending on a patient’s threshold of tolerance for a side effect
and the impact on the quality of life, side effects can lead to drug
discontinuation. Examples of serious side effects include agranulocytosis
(clozapine), Stevens–Johnson syndrome (lamotrigine [Lamictal]), hepatic
failure (nefazodone [Serzone]), stroke (phenelzine [Nardil]), and heart block
(thioridazine [Mellaril]). Overall, the risk of life-threatening side effects with
psychotropics is low. Drugs that carry such a risk should be monitored more
closely, and the prescribing physician should take into account whether the
potential clinical benefits justify the additional risk. Any drug with a serious
risk, as reflected in a black box warning, is generally used less extensively




<<<PAGE 1978>>>

have found that antidepressants with serotonin-norepinephrine activity—
drugs such as the MAOIs, TCAs, venlafaxine (Effexor), and mirtazapine
(Remeron)—may produce higher rates of remission than SSRIs in head-tohead studies. The continued role of SSRIs as first-line treatment thus reflects
their simplicity of use, safety, and a broad spectrum of action.
Direct comparisons of individual SSRIs have not revealed any to be
consistently superior to another. There nevertheless can be considerable
diversity in response to the various SSRIs among individuals. For example,
more than 50 percent of people who respond poorly to one SSRI will respond
favorably to another. Thus, before shifting to non-SSRI antidepressants, it is
most reasonable to try other agents in the SSRI class for persons who did not
respond to the first SSRI.
Some clinicians have attempted to select a particular SSRI for a specific
person based on the drug’s unique adverse effect profile. For example,
thinking that fluoxetine is an activating and stimulating SSRI, they may
assume it is a better choice for an abulic person than paroxetine, which is
presumed to be a sedating SSRI. These differences, however, usually vary
from person to person. Analyses of clinical trial data show that SSRIs are
more effective in patients with more severe symptoms of major depression
than those with milder symptoms.
SUICIDE. The FDA has issued a black box warning for antidepressants and

suicidal thoughts and behavior in children and young adults. This warning is
based on a decade-old analysis of clinical trial data. More recent,
comprehensive reanalysis of data has shown that suicidal thoughts and
behavior decreased over time for adult and geriatric patients treated with
antidepressants as compared with placebo. No differences were found for
youths. In adults, reduction in suicide ideation and attempts occurred through
a reduction in depressive symptoms. In all age groups, the severity of
depression improved with medication and was significantly related to suicide
ideation or behavior. It appears that SSRIs, as well as serotoninnorepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs), have a protective effect against
suicide that is mediated by decreases in depressive symptoms with treatment.
For youths, no significant effects of treatment on suicidal thoughts and
behavior were found, although depression responded to treatment. No
evidence of increased suicide risk was observed in youths receiving active




<<<PAGE 1985>>>

spectrum disorders. Fluoxetine has been reported to be useful for features of
autism in children, adolescents, and adults.
Precautions and Adverse Reactions. SSRI side effects need to be
considered in terms of their onset, duration, and severity. For example,
nausea and jitteriness are early, generally mild, and time-limited side effects.
Although SSRIs share similar side effect profiles, individual drugs in this
class may cause a higher rate or carry a more severe risk of specific side
effects depending on the patient.
Sexual Dysfunction. All SSRIs cause sexual dysfunction, and it is the
most common adverse effect of SSRIs associated with long-term treatment. It
has an estimated incidence of between 50 and 80 percent. The most common
complaints are anorgasmia, inhibited orgasm, and decreased libido. Some
studies suggest that sexual dysfunction is dose-related, but this has not been
established. Unlike most of the other adverse effects of SSRIs, sexual
inhibition rarely resolves in the first few weeks of use but usually continues
as long as the drug is taken. In some cases, there may be an improvement
over time.
Strategies to counteract SSRI-induced sexual dysfunction are numerous,
and none has been proven to be very useful. Some reports suggest decreasing
the dosage or adding bupropion (Wellbutrin) or amphetamine. Reports have
described successful treatment of SSRI-induced sexual dysfunction with
agents such as sildenafil (Viagra), which are used to treat erectile
dysfunction. Ultimately, patients may need to be switched to antidepressants
that do not interfere with sexual functioning, drugs such as mirtazapine or
bupropion.
Gastrointestinal Adverse Effects. GI side effects are widespread and
are mediated mainly through effects on the serotonin 5-HT3 receptor. The
most frequent GI complaints are nausea, diarrhea, anorexia, vomiting,
flatulence, and dyspepsia. Sertraline and fluvoxamine produce the most
intense GI symptoms. Delayed-release paroxetine, compared with the
immediate-release preparation of paroxetine, has less intense GI side effects
during the first week of treatment. However, paroxetine, because of its
anticholinergic activity, frequently causes constipation. Nausea and loose




<<<PAGE 2000>>>

venlafaxine may be beneficial in the treatment of obsessive-compulsive
disorder, panic disorder, agoraphobia, social phobia, ADHD, and patients
with a dual diagnosis of depression and cocaine dependence. It has also been
used in chronic pain syndromes with good effect.
Precautions and Adverse Reactions. Venlafaxine has a safety and
tolerability profile similar to that of the more widely prescribed SSRI class.
Nausea is the most frequently reported treatment-emergent adverse effect
associated with venlafaxine and DVS therapy. Initiating therapy at lower
dosages may also attenuate nausea. When extremely problematic, treatmentinduced nausea can be controlled by prescribing a selective 5-HT3 antagonist
or mirtazapine (Remeron).
Venlafaxine and DVS therapy is associated with sexual side effects,
predominantly decreased libido and a delay to orgasm or ejaculation. The
incidence of these side effects may exceed 30 to 40 percent when there is a
direct, detailed assessment of sexual function.
Other common side effects include headache, insomnia, somnolence, dry
mouth, dizziness, constipation, asthenia, sweating, and nervousness.
Although several side effects are suggestive of anticholinergic effects, these
drugs have no affinity for muscarinic or nicotinic receptors. Thus,
noradrenergic agonism is likely to be the culprit.
Higher-dose venlafaxine therapy is associated with an increased risk of
sustained elevations of BP. Experience with the instant-release (IR)
formulation in studies of depressed patients indicated that sustained
hypertension was dose-related, increasing from 3 to 7 percent at doses of 100
to 300 mg/day and 13 percent at doses greater than 300 mg/day. In this
dataset, venlafaxine therapy did not adversely affect BP control of patients
taking antihypertensives and lowered the mean values of patients with
elevated BP readings before therapy. In controlled studies of the extendedrelease formulation, venlafaxine therapy resulted in only approximately 1
percent greater risk of high BP when compared with the placebo. Arbitrarily
capping the upper dose of venlafaxine used in these studies, thus,
significantly attenuated concerns about elevated BP. When higher doses of
the extended-release formulation are used, however, monitoring of BP is
recommended.
Venlafaxine and DVS are commonly associated with discontinuation




<<<PAGE 2011>>>

increases in dose should never exceed 100 mg in 3 days; a single dose of
immediate-release bupropion should never exceed 150 mg, and the total daily
dosage should not exceed 450 mg. The maximum of 400 mg of the sustainedrelease version should be used as a twice-a-day regimen of either 200 mg
twice daily or 300 mg in the morning and 100 mg in the afternoon. A starting
dosage of the sustained-release version, 100 mg once a day, can be increased
to 100 mg twice a day after 4 days. Then 150 mg twice a day may be used. A
single dose of sustained-release bupropion should never exceed 300 mg. The
maximum dosage is 200 mg twice a day of the immediate-release or
extended-release formulations. An advantage of the extended-release
preparation is that the patient can take a single daily dose of 450 mg after
proper titration.
For smoking cessation, the patient should start taking 150 mg a day of
sustained-release bupropion 10 to 14 days before quitting smoking. On the
fourth day, the dosage should be increased to 150 mg twice daily. Treatment
generally lasts 7 to 12 weeks.

MIRTAZAPINE
Mirtazapine (Remeron) is unique among drugs used to treat major depression
in that it increases both norepinephrine and serotonin through a mechanism
other than reuptake blockade (as in the case of tricyclic agents or SSRIs) or
monoamine oxidase inhibition (as in the case of phenelzine or
tranylcypromine). Mirtazapine is also more likely to reduce rather than cause
nausea and diarrhea, the result of its effects on serotonin 5-HT3 receptors.
Characteristic side effects include increased appetite and sedation.
Pharmacologic Actions
Mirtazapine is administered orally and is rapidly and completely absorbed. It
has a half-life of about 30 hours. Peak concentration is achieved within 2
hours of ingestion, and steady state is reached after 6 days. Plasma clearance
may be slowed up to 30 percent in persons with impaired hepatic function, up
to 50 percent in those with impaired renal function, up to 40 percent slower in
older men, and up to 10 percent slower in older women.
The mechanism of action of mirtazapine is the antagonism of central




<<<PAGE 2012>>>

presynaptic α2-adrenergic receptors and blockade of postsynaptic serotonin 5HT2 and 5-HT3 receptors. The α2-adrenergic receptor antagonism causes the
increased firing of norepinephrine and serotonin neurons. The potent
antagonist of serotonin 5-HT2 and 5-HT3 receptors serves to decrease
anxiety, relieve insomnia, and stimulate the appetite. Mirtazapine is a potent
antagonist of histamine H1 receptors and is a moderately potent antagonist at
α1-adrenergic and muscarinic-cholinergic receptors.
Therapeutic Indications
Mirtazapine is effective for the treatment of depression. It is highly sedating,
making it a reasonable choice for use in depressed patients with severe or
long-standing insomnia. Some patients find the residual daytime sedation
associated with the initiation of treatment to be quite pronounced. However,
the more extreme sedating properties of the drug generally lessen over the
first week of treatment. Combined with the tendency to sometimes cause a
ravenous appetite, mirtazapine is well suited for depressed patients with
melancholic features such as insomnia, weight loss, and agitation. Elderly
depressed patients, in particular, are good candidates for mirtazapine; young
adults are more likely to object to this side effect profile.
Mirtazapine’s blockade of 5-HT3 receptors, a mechanism associated with
medications used to combat the severe GI side effects of cancer
chemotherapy agents, has led to the use of the drug in a similar role. In this
population, sedation and stimulation of appetite clearly could be seen as
being beneficial instead of unwelcome side effects.
Mirtazapine is often combined with SSRIs or venlafaxine to augment
antidepressant response or counteract serotonergic side effects of those drugs,
particularly nausea, agitation, and insomnia. Mirtazapine has no significant
pharmacokinetic interactions with other antidepressants.
Precautions and Adverse Reactions
Somnolence, the most common adverse effect of mirtazapine, occurs in more
than 50 percent of persons (Table 21-18). Persons starting mirtazapine should
thus exercise caution when driving or operating dangerous machinery and
even when getting out of bed at night. This adverse effect is why mirtazapine




<<<PAGE 2013>>>

is almost always given before sleep. Mirtazapine potentiates the sedative
effects of other CNS depressants, so potentially sedating prescription or overthe-counter drugs and alcohol should be avoided during the use of
mirtazapine. Mirtazapine also causes dizziness in 7 percent of persons. It
does not appear to increase the risk of seizures. Mania or hypomania occurred
in clinical trials at a rate similar to that of other antidepressant drugs.
Mirtazapine increases appetite in about one-third of patients. Mirtazapine
may also increase serum cholesterol concentration to 20 percent or more
above the upper limit of normal in 15 percent of persons and increase
triglycerides to 500 mg/dL or more in 6 percent of persons. Elevations of
alanine transaminase levels to more than three times the upper limit of normal
were seen in 2 percent of mirtazapine-treated persons as opposed to 0.3
percent of placebo control subjects.
In limited premarketing experience, the absolute neutrophil count dropped
to 500/mm3 or less within 2 months of the onset of use in 0.3 percent of
persons, some of whom developed symptomatic infections. This hematologic
condition was reversible in all cases and was more likely to occur when other
risk factors for neutropenia were present. Increases in the frequency of
neutropenia have not, however, been reported during the extensive
postmarketing period. Persons who develop fever, chills, sore throat, mucous
membrane ulceration, or other signs of infection should nevertheless be
evaluated medically. If a low WBC count is found, mirtazapine should be
immediately discontinued, and the infectious disease status should be
followed closely.
Table 21-18
Adverse Reactions Reported with Mirtazapine
Event

Patients (%)

Somnolence

54

Dry mouth

25

Increased appetite

17

Constipation

13




<<<PAGE 2014>>>

Weight gain

12

Dizziness

7

Myalgias

5

Disturbing dreams

4

A small number of persons experience orthostatic hypotension while
taking mirtazapine. Although no data exist regarding the effects on fetal
development, mirtazapine should be used with caution during pregnancy.
Mirtazapine use by pregnant women has not been studied, but because the
drug may be excreted in breast milk, it should not be taken by nursing
mothers. Because of the risk of agranulocytosis associated with mirtazapine
use, persons should be attuned to signs of infection. Because of the sedating
effects of mirtazapine, persons should determine the degree to which they are
affected before engaging in driving or other potentially dangerous activities.
Drug Interactions
Mirtazapine can potentiate the sedation of alcohol and benzodiazepines.
Mirtazapine should not be used within 14 days of use of an MAOI.
Laboratory Interferences
No laboratory interferences have yet been described for mirtazapine.
Dosage and Administration
Mirtazapine is available in 15-, 30-, and 45-mg scored tablets. Mirtazapine is
also available in 15-, 30-, and 45-mg orally disintegrating tablets for persons
who have difficulty swallowing pills. If persons fail to respond to the initial
dose of 15 mg of mirtazapine before sleep, the dose may be increased in 15mg increments every 5 days to a maximum of 45 mg before sleep. Lower
dosages may be necessary for elderly persons or persons with renal or hepatic
insufficiency.

NEFAZODONE AND TRAZODONE
Nefazodone (Serzone) and Trazodone (Desyrel) are mechanistically and




<<<PAGE 2249>>>

movement disorders as a predictor for neuroleptic-induced extrapyramidal
symptoms. Br J Psychiatry. 2004;185:465–471.
Lieberman JA, Stroup TS, McEvoy JP, Swartz MS, Rosenheck RA. Clinical
Antipsychotic Trials of Intervention Effectiveness (CATIE) investigators.
N Engl J Med. 2005;353:1209–1223.
Liguori A. Psychopharmacology of attention: the impact of drugs in an age of
increased distractions. Exp Clin Psychopharmacol. 2013;21(5):343–344.
Lyons KE, Pahwa R. Efficacy and tolerability of levetiracetam in Parkinson
disease patients with levodopa-induced dyskinesia. Clin Neuropharmacol.
2006;29(3):
148–153.
Malizia AL. The role of emission tomography in pharmacokinetic and
pharmacodynamic studies in clinical psychopharmacology. J
Psychopharmacol. 2006;20(Suppl 4):100–107.
McGrath PJ, Stewart JW, Quitkin FM, Chen Y, Alpert JE. Predictors of
relapse in a prospective study of fluoxetine treatment of major depression.
Am J Psychiatry. 2006;163(9):1542–1548.
Meco G, Fabrizio E, Epifanio A, Morgante F, Valente M. Levetiracetam in
tardive dyskinesia. Clin Neuropharmacol. 2006;29:265.
Meyer JH, Ginovart N, Boovariwala A, Sagrati S, Hussey D. Elevated
monoamine oxidase a levels in the brain: an explanation for the
monoamine imbalance of major depression. Arch Gen Psychiatry.
2006;63:1209–1216.
Miller del D, Caroff SN, Davis SM, Rosenheck RA, McEvoy JP. Clinical
Antipsychotic Trials of Intervention Effectiveness (CATIE) investigators:
extrapyramidal side-effects of antipsychotics in a randomised trial. Br J
Psychiatry. 2008;193:279.
Moncrieff J. Magic bullets for mental disorders: the emergence of the concept
of an “antipsychotic” drug. J Hist Neurosci. 2013;22(1):30–46.
Pappa S, Dazzan P. Spontaneous movement disorders in antipsychotic-naive
patients with first-episode psychoses: a systematic review. Psychol Med.
2009;39:
1065–1076.
Poyurovsky M, Pashinian A, Weizman R, Fuchs C, Weizman A. Low-dose
mirtazapine: a new option in the treatment of antipsychotic-induced
akathisia. A randomized, double-blind, placebo- and propranolol-




<<<PAGE 2260>>>

Kim SW, Shin IS, Kim JM, Park KH, Youn T, Yoon JS. Factors potentiating
the risk of mirtazapine-associated restless legs syndrome. Hum
Psychopharmocol. 2008;(7):615–620.
Kocsis JH, Leon AC, Markowitz JC, Manber R, Arnow B, Klein DN, Thase
ME. Patient preference as a moderator of outcome for chronic forms of
major depressive disorder treated with nefazodone, cognitive behavioral
analysis system of psychotherapy, or their combination. J Clin Psychiatry.
2009;70(3):354–361.
Koibuchi N. The role of thyroid hormone on functional organization in the
cerebellum. Cerebellum. 2013;12(3):304–306.
Kostrubsky SE, Strom SC, Kalgutkar AS, Kulkarni S, Atherton J. Inhibition
of hepatobiliary transport as a predictive method for clinical hepatotoxicity
of nefazodone. Toxicol Sci. 2006;90(2):451–459.
Lai MW, Klein-Schwartz W, Rodgers GC, Abrams JY, Haber DA. 2005
Annual report of the American Association of Poison Control Centers’
national poisoning and exposure database. Clin Toxicol. 2006;44:803–932.
Lam RW, Andersen HF, Wade AG. Escitalopram and duloxetine in the
treatment of major depressive disorder: a pooled analysis of two trials. Int
Clin Psychopharmacol. 2008;23(4):181.
Lapierre YD. A review of trimipramine: 30 years of clinical use. Drugs.
1989;38(Suppl 1):
17–24.
Lieberman DZ, Montgomery SA, Tourian KA, Brisard C, Rosas G. A pooled
analysis of two placebo-controlled trials of desvenlafaxine in major
depressive disorder. Int Clin Psychopharmacol. 2008;23:188–197.
Liebowitz MR, Manley AL, Padmanabhan SK, Ganguly R, Tummala R.
Efficacy, safety, and tolerability of desvenlafaxine 50 mg/day and 100
mg/day in outpatients with major depressive disorder. Curr Med Res Opin.
2008;24:1877–1890.
Liebowitz MR, Quitkin FM, Stewart JW. Antidepressant specificity in
atypical depression. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 1988;45:129–137.
Lojko D, Rybakowski JK. L-Thyroxine augmentation of serotonergic
antidepressants in female patients with refractory depression. J Affect
Disord. 2007;103(1–3):
253–256.
Looper KL. Potential medical and surgical complications of serotonergic




<<<PAGE 2263>>>

double-blind comparison of duloxetine and venlafaxine in the treatment of
patients with major depressive disorder. J Psychiatr Res. 2008;42:22–34.
Perkins KA, Karelitz JL, Jao NC, Stratton E. Possible reinforcement
enhancing effects of bupropion during initial smoking abstinence. Nicotine
Tob Res. 2013;15(6):
1141–1145.
Posternak M, Novak S, Stern A, Hennessey J, Joffe A. A pilot effectiveness
study: placebo-controlled trial of adjunctive L-triiodothyronine (T3) used
to accelerate and potentiate the antidepressant response. Int J
Neuropsychopharmacol. 2008;11(1):15–25.
Reeves RR, Ladner ME. Additional evidence of the abuse potential of
bupropion. J Clin Pharmacol. 2013;33(4):584–585.
Roose S, Laghrissi-Thode F, Kennedy JS, Nelson JC, Bigger JT. A
comparison of paroxetine and nortriptyline in depressed patients with
ischemic heart disease. JAMA. 1998;279:287–91.
Rynn M, Russell J, Erickson J, Detke MJ, Ball S. Efficacy and safety of
duloxetine in the treatment of generalized anxiety disorder: a flexible-dose,
progressive-titration, placebo-controlled trial. Depress
Anxiety.
2008;25:182–189.
Salahudeen MS, Wright C M, Peterson GM. “Esketamine: new hope for the
treatment of treatment-resistant depression? A narrative review.” Ther Adv
Drug
Saf.
2020;11:
2042098620937899.
https://doi.org/10.1177/2042098620937899.
Salsali M, Holt A, Baker GB. Inhibitory effects of the monoamine oxidase
inhibitor tranylcypromine on the cytochrome P450 enzymes CYP2C19,
CYP2C6, and CYP2D6. Cell Mol Neurobiol. 2004;24:63–76.
Sasada K, Iwamoto K, Kawano N, Kohmura K, Yamamoto M, Aleksic B,
Ebe K, Noda Y, Ozaki N. Effects of repeated dosing with mirtazapine,
trazodone, or placebo on driving performance and cognitive function in
healthy volunteers. Hum Psychopharmacol. 2013;28(3):281–286.
Scarff JR. “Use of Brexanolone for Postpartum Depression.” Innov Clin
Neurosci. 2019;16(11–12):32–35.
Schatzberg AF, Kremer C, Rodrigues HE, Murphy GM Jr. Double-blind,
randomized comparison of mirtazapine and paroxetine in elderly depressed
patients. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2002;10:541–550.




<<<PAGE 2264>>>

Schatzberg AF, Prather MR, Keller MB, Rush AJ, Laird LK. Clinical use of
nefazodone in major depression: a 6-year perspective. J Clin Psychiatry.
2002;63(1):18–31.
Schatzberg AF, Rush AJ, Arnow BA, Banks PL, Blalock JA. Chronic
depression: medication (nefazodone) or psychotherapy (CBASP) is
effective when the other is not. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2005;62(5):513–520.
Schittecatte M, Dumont F, Machowski R, Fontaine E, Cornil C, Mendlewicz
J, Wilmotte J. Mirtazapine, but not fluvoxamine, normalizes the blunted
REM sleep response to clonidine in depressed patients: implications for
subsensitivity of alpha(2)-adrenergic receptors in depression. Psychiatry
Res. 2002;109:1–8.
Shenouda R, Desan PH. Abuse of tricyclic antidepressant drugs: a case
series. J Clin Psychopharmcol. 2013;33(3):440–442.
Smith T, Nicholson RA. Review of duloxetine in the management of diabetic
peripheral neuropathic pain. Vasc Health Risk Manag. 2007;3:833–844.
Stahl SM, Felker A. Monoamine oxidase inhibitors: a modern guide to an
unrequited class of antidepressants. CNS Spectr. 2008;13:855–870.
Stenberg JH, Terevnikov V, Joffe M, Tiihonen J, Chukhin E, Burkin M, Joffe
G. Predictors and mediators of add-on mirtazapine-induced cognitive
enhancement in schizophrenia—a path model investigation.
Neuropharmacology. 2013;64:248–253.
Sussman N. Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock
VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of
Psychiatry. 9th ed. Vol. 2. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins; 2009:3190.
Sylven SM, Elenis E, Michelakos T, Larsson A, Olovsson M, Poromaa IS,
Skalkidou A. Thyroid function tests at delivery and risk for postpartum
depressive symptoms. Psychoneuroendocrinology. 2013;38(7):1007–1013.
Tanimukai H, Murai T, Okazaki N, Matsuda Y, Okamoto Y, Kabeshita Y,
Ohno Y, Tsuneto S. An observational study of insomnia and nightmare
treated with trazodone in patients with advanced cancer. Am J Hosp Palliat
Care. 2013;30(4):359–362.
Thase ME. Mirtazapine. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan &
Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Vol. 2.
Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins: 2009:3152.
Thase ME. Selective serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors. In:




<<<PAGE 2691>>>

experience with medically ill patients show that the pharmacologic treatment
of depression can be useful even when definable medical causes exist and
even in the last days of life.
A patient with diabetes and end-stage renal disease who had been on
dialysis for 2 years was diagnosed with depression with marked insomnia
and was started on 15 mg by mouth every day of mirtazapine, which
helped her sleep immediately and showed an antidepressant effect within
3 weeks. Four weeks later, she was admitted to the hospital in congestive
heart failure for what was to be her terminal admission. She did not wish
to give up the antidepressant but now felt oversedated and wished that
she could be more alert during the day to interact with her loved ones.
She was started on methylphenidate 5 mg by mouth twice daily, after
which she was more alert, engaged, and communicative with her family.
On her death, her family was grateful to have been able to connect with
her until the end.

CONFUSIONAL STATES IN PATIENTS WITH ADVANCED
DISEASE
The prevalence of delirium rises to 85 percent in patients with advanced
disease. If one includes the last hours of life, it nears 100 percent unless the
patient lapses rapidly into a coma or dies of an acute event, such as
pulmonary embolus. Acute events are always unexpected and traumatize the
survivors even though they knew full well that the patient was near the end of
life. Some patients slip into an irreversible coma, leaving families in a
bedside vigil, which may give them a period of adaptation before the final
instant of death. However, for some 75 to 85 percent of patients, death is
associated with a period of delirium.
Patients frequently experience some disorientation, impaired memory,
concentration, and altered arousal as they become increasingly ill. These
symptoms may remain mild or may be the harbingers of full delirium.
Clinicians should be aware that mild and early signs of delirium are often
mistaken for depression, anxiety, and poor coping.




<<<PAGE 3690>>>

cognitive continuum, 264, 264f
course and prognosis, 264–265
criteria for, 262, 262t
definition, 262
epidemiology and etiology, 265, 265f
historical perspective, 263
terms related to, 263t
treatment, 265, 266t
Milieu therapy, 794
Military psychiatry, 834
Miller, Neal, 765
Million Clinical Multiaxial Inventory (MCMI), 58t
Millon Adolescent Personality Inventory (MAPI), 83t
Milnacipran, 635
Miltown. See Meprobamate
Mini-Mental Status Examination (MMSE), 9, 45, 52, 89
Minipress. See Prazosin
Minnesota model, 214
Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory (MMPI), 1041
Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory 2 (MMPI-2), 54t, 55, 56,
57, 58t
Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory-Adolescent (MMPI-A),
83t
Minocycline, 592
Mirapex. See Pramipexole
Mirtazapine
dosage and administration, 638
drug interactions, 638
mechanism of action, 637
precautions and adverse reactions, 637–638, 637t
therapeutic indications, 637
Mixed receptive–expressive language deficits, 112–114. See also
Language disorders
MMPI. See Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory (MMPI)
MMSE. See Mini-Mental Status Examination (MMSE)
M’Naghten rule, 843
Mobile or cell phone compulsion, 333




<<<PAGE 3730>>>

related to mental disorder/general medical condition, 588
sibling, 590
Relaxation response, 772
Relaxation therapy, 766, 771
breathing exercises, 766
for insomnia, 511–512
progressive relaxation, 766–767, 766t, 771
Reliability, 30, 57
internal consistency, 30
interrater, 30
issues in interpreting data, 31
test–retest, 30
Religious/spiritual problem, 586
RELN gene, 995
Remeron. See Mirtazapine
Remission, 603
Remote memory, 932, 1032
REM sleep behavior disorder (RBD), 488, 500, 501t
REM sleep–suppressing drugs, 513
Renal function, tests of, 66
Repetition compulsion, 1061
Repetition process, 745
Repetitive self-mutilation, 333
Repetitive TMS (rTMS), 736, 737
Repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS), 446
Report of the Committee on Physician-Assisted Suicide and Euthanasia,
865
Repression, 3
Reprocessing, 775
Requip. See Ropinirole
Research Units in Pediatric Psychopharmacology (RUPP), 203
Reserpine, 605, 732, 959
Residential care, 827
Resilience and mental health, 1039–1040
Resistances, 3
Resource holding potential, 1040
Respiratory system, examination of, 19


