<<<PAGE 1249>>>

sweating, male
sexual
dysfunction
Desvenlafaxine

50–100

Dry mouth,
dizziness,
nausea,
sweating

None

Duloxetine

30–120

Nausea, dry mouth, None
constipation,
insomnia, male
sexual
dysfunction

Levomilnacipran

20–80

Nausea, dry mouth, None
headaches, male
sexual
dysfunction

Other Second-Generation and Novel Antidepressants
Agomelatinea

25–50

None

None

Bupropion

150–450

Insomnia, dry
mouth, nausea

Headaches

Mirtazapine

15–60

Dry mouth,
constipation,
increased
appetite, weight
gain

Somnolence

Moclobemidea

300–600

None

None

Vilazodone

10–40

Diarrhea, nausea,
headaches

None

Vortioxetine

10–20

Nausea

None

aNot routinely available in the United States.




<<<PAGE 1306>>>

recommended
MAOIs

Insufficient
evidence

Second line

Second line

RIMA-Moclobemide Insufficient
evidence

Insufficient
evidence

Second Line

Other Psychotropics Second line
—Agomelatine,
Buspirone,
Mirtazapine

Second line

Second line

Benzodiazepines

Second line

Second line

Second line

Atypical
Second line
Antipsychotics—
Quetiapine

Insufficient
evidence

Not
recommended

Anticonvulsant—
Pregabalin

Insufficient
evidence

Second line

Second line

Note: Beta-adrenergic blocking agents are recommended only for performance anxiety.
RIMA, reversible monoamine oxidase inhibitor; GAD, generalized anxiety disorder; PD, panic
disorder; SAD, social anxiety disorder.

In the case of specific phobia, psychotherapies, particularly behavioral
therapies, are the first-line choice. SSRIs may be helpful, although there are
few studies of SSRIs for this disorder.
For agoraphobia, the main goal of pharmacotherapy is to treat the panic
attacks that are usually comorbid. Early studies did not support the use of
medications for “pure” agoraphobia; however, there has been little research
since.
Psychosocial Therapies
There is strong support for a variety of psychosocial therapies for anxiety
disorders, including cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT), behavioral
therapies, and interpersonal therapy. Studies of CBT suggest it has a
substantial effect on generalized anxiety disorder, panic disorder, and social
anxiety disorder, although this evidence is tempered by concerns about




<<<PAGE 2034>>>

used as a treatment for tuberculosis, but its antidepressant properties were
discovered by chance when some treated patients experienced elevation of
mood during treatment. Despite their effectiveness, prescription of MAOIs as
first-line agents has always been limited by concern about the development of
potentially lethal hypertension and the consequent need for a restrictive diet.
The use of MAOIs declined further after the introduction of the SSRIs and
other new agents. They are now mainly relegated to use in treatment-resistant
cases. Thus, the second-line status of MAOIs has less to do with
considerations of efficacy than with safety concerns. The currently available
MAOIs
include
phenelzine
(Nardil),
isocarboxazid
(Marplan),
tranylcypromine (Parnate), rasagiline (Azilect), moclobemide (Manerix), and
selegiline (Eldepryl).
Two subsequent advances in the field of antidepressant MAOIs involve the
introduction of a selective reversible inhibitor of MAOA (RIMA),
moclobemide (Manerix), in the early 1990s into most countries except the
United States, and in 2005, the introduction of a transdermal delivery form of
selegiline (Emsam) in the United States that is used for the treatment of
parkinsonism. Other RIMA agents, including brofaromine (Consonar) and
befloxatone, have not been submitted for registration despite favorable
outcomes in clinical trials.
Pharmacologic Actions
Phenelzine, tranylcypromine, and isocarboxazid are readily absorbed after
oral administration and reach peak plasma concentrations within 2 hours.
Whereas their plasma half-lives are in the range of 2 to 3 hours, their tissue
half-lives are considerably longer. Because they irreversibly inactivate
MAOs, the therapeutic effect of a single dose of irreversible MAOIs may
persist for as long as 2 weeks. The RIMA moclobemide is rapidly absorbed
and has a half-life of 0.5 to 3.5 hours. Because it is a reversible inhibitor,
moclobemide has a much briefer clinical effect after a single dose than do
irreversible MAOIs.
The MAO enzymes are found on the outer membranes of mitochondria,
where they degrade cytoplasmic and extraneuronal monoamine
neurotransmitters such as norepinephrine, serotonin, dopamine, epinephrine,
and tyramine. MAOIs act in the CNS, the sympathetic nervous system, the




<<<PAGE 2036>>>

another, the clinician should taper and stop the use of the first drug for 10 to
14 days before beginning the use of the second drug.
Paresthesias, myoclonus, and muscle pains are occasionally seen in
persons treated with MAOIs. Paresthesias may be secondary to MAOIinduced pyridoxine deficiency, which may respond to supplementation with
pyridoxine, 50 to 150 mg orally each day. Occasionally, persons complain of
feeling drunk or confused, perhaps indicating that the dosage should be
reduced and then increased gradually. Reports that the hydrazine MAOIs are
associated with hepatotoxic effects are relatively uncommon. MAOIs are less
cardiotoxic and less epileptogenic than are the tricyclic and tetracyclic drugs.
The most common adverse effects of the RIMA moclobemide are
dizziness, nausea, and insomnia or sleep disturbance. RIMAs cause fewer GI
adverse effects than do SSRIs. Moclobemide does not have adverse
anticholinergic or cardiovascular effects, and it has not been reported to
interfere with sexual function.
MAOIs should be used with caution by persons with renal disease,
cardiovascular disease, or hyperthyroidism. MAOIs may alter the dosage of a
hypoglycemic agent required by persons with diabetes. MAOIs have been
significantly associated with the induction of mania in persons in the
depressed phase of bipolar I disorder and triggering a psychotic
decompensation in persons with schizophrenia. MAOIs are contraindicated
during pregnancy, although data on their teratogenic risk are minimal.
Nursing women should not take MAOIs because the drugs can pass into
breast milk.
Tyramine-Induced Hypertensive Crisis. The most worrisome side
effect of MAOIs is the tyramine-induced hypertensive crisis. The amino acid
tyramine is usually transformed via GI metabolism. However, MAOIs
inactivate GI metabolism of dietary tyramine, thus allowing intact tyramine
to enter the circulation. A hypertensive crisis may subsequently occur as a
result of a powerful pressor effect of the amino acid. Tyramine-containing
foods should be avoided for 2 weeks after the last dose of an irreversible
MAOI to allow the resynthesis of adequate concentrations of MAO enzymes.
Accordingly, foods rich in tyramine (Table 21-22) or other
sympathomimetic amines, such as ephedrine, pseudoephedrine (Sudafed), or
dextromethorphan (Trocal), should be avoided by persons who are taking




<<<PAGE 2038>>>

Others: Banana or avocado (ripe or not), banana peel
aAny food left out to age or spoil can spontaneously develop tyramine through fermentation.
bAlcohol can produce profound orthostasis interacting with monoamine oxidase inhibitors

(MAOIs) but cannot produce direct hypotensive reactions.
cWhite wines, gin, and vodka have no tyramine content.
Table by Jonathan M. Himmelhoch, M.D.

An MAOI-induced hypertensive crisis should be treated with α-adrenergic
antagonists—for example, phentolamine (Regitine) or chlorpromazine
(Thorazine). These drugs lower BP within 5 minutes. IV furosemide (Lasix)
can be used to reduce fluid load, and a β-adrenergic receptor antagonist can
control tachycardia. A sublingual 10-mg dose of nifedipine (Procardia) can
be given and repeated after 20 minutes. Persons with thyrotoxicosis or
pheochromocytoma should not use MAOIs.
The risk of tyramine-induced hypertensive crises is relatively low for
persons who are taking RIMAs, such as moclobemide and befloxatone. These
drugs have relatively little inhibitory activity for MAOB, and because they are
reversible, regular activity of existing MAOA returns within 16 to 48 hours of
the last dose of a RIMA. Therefore, the dietary restrictions are less stringent
for RIMAs, applying only to foods containing high concentrations of
tyramine, which need to be avoided for 3 days after the last dose of a RIMA.
A reasonable dietary recommendation for persons taking RIMAs is to avoid
eating tyramine-containing foods 1 hour before and 2 hours after taking a
RIMA.
Spontaneous, nontyramine-induced hypertensive crisis is a rare occurrence,
usually shortly after the first exposure of an MAOI. Persons experiencing
such a crisis should avoid MAOIs altogether.
Withdrawal. Abrupt cessation of regular doses of MAOIs may cause a selflimited discontinuation syndrome consisting of arousal, mood disturbances,
and somatic symptoms. Dosages should be gradually tapered over several
weeks to avoid these symptoms.
Overdose. It often takes 1 to 6 hours after an overdose for the toxic
symptoms to occur. MAOI overdose is characterized by agitation that can
progress to coma with hyperthermia, hypertension, tachypnea, tachycardia,




<<<PAGE 2039>>>

dilated pupils, and hyperactive deep tendon reflexes. Involuntary movements
may be present, particularly in the face and the jaw. Acidification of the urine
markedly hastens the excretion of MAOIs, and dialysis can be of some use.
Phentolamine or chlorpromazine may be useful if hypertension is a problem.
Moclobemide alone in overdosage causes relatively mild and reversible
symptoms.
Drug Interactions
The significant drug–drug interactions involving MAOIs are listed in Table
21-23. Most antidepressants, as well as precursor agents, should be avoided.
Persons should be instructed to tell any other physicians or dentists who are
treating them that they are taking an MAOI. MAOIs may potentiate the
action of CNS depressants, including alcohol and barbiturates. MAOIs should
not be coadministered with serotonergic drugs, such as SSRIs and
clomipramine (Anafranil), because this combination can trigger serotonin
syndrome. The use of lithium or tryptophan with an irreversible MAOI may
also induce serotonin syndrome. Initial symptoms of serotonin syndrome can
include tremor, hypertonicity, myoclonus, and autonomic signs, which can
then progress to hallucinosis, hyperthermia, and even death. Fatal reactions
had occurred when MAOIs were combined with meperidine (Demerol) or
fentanyl (Sublimaze).
Table 21-23
Drugs to Be Avoided during Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitor
Treatment (Partial Listing)
Never Use
Antiasthmatics
Antihypertensives (methyldopa, guanethidine, reserpine)
Buspirone
Levodopa
Opioids (especially meperidine, dextromethorphan,
propoxyphene, tramadol; morphine or codeine may be less
dangerous)
Cold, allergy, or sinus medications containing dextromethorphan




<<<PAGE 2040>>>

or sympathomimetics
SSRIs, clomipramine, venlafaxine, sibutramine
Sympathomimetics (amphetamines, cocaine, methylphenidate,
dopamine, epinephrine, norepinephrine, isoproterenol,
ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, phenylpropanolamine)
L-Tryptophan
Use Carefully
Anticholinergics
Antihistamines
Disulfiram
Bromocriptine
Hydralazine
Sedative-hypnotics
Terpin hydrate with codeine
Tricyclics and tetracyclics (avoid clomipramine)
SSRI, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor.

When switching from an irreversible MAOI to any other type of
antidepressant drug, persons should wait at least 14 days after the last dose of
the MAOI before beginning the use of the next drug to allow replenishment
of the body’s MAOs. When switching from an antidepressant to an
irreversible MAOI, persons should wait 10 to 14 days (or 5 weeks for
fluoxetine [Prozac]) before starting the use of the MAOI to avoid drug–drug
interactions. In contrast, MAO activity recovers completely 24 to 48 hours
after the last dose of a RIMA.
The effects of the MAOIs on hepatic enzymes are poorly studied.
Tranylcypromine inhibits CYP2C19. Moclobemide inhibits CYP2D6,
CYP2C19, and CYP1A2 and is a substrate for 2C19.
Cimetidine (Tagamet) and fluoxetine significantly reduce the elimination
of moclobemide. Modest doses of fluoxetine and moclobemide administered
concurrently may be well tolerated, with no significant pharmacodynamic or
pharmacokinetic interactions.
Laboratory Interferences
MAOIs may lower blood glucose concentrations. MAOIs artificially raise




<<<PAGE 2042>>>

(Eldepryl)
Moclobemide
(Manerix)

300–600

600

100- or 150-mg
tablets

Even though coadministration of MAOIs with TCAs, SSRIs, or lithium is
generally contraindicated, these combinations have been used successfully
and safely to treat patients with refractory depression. However, they should
be used with extreme caution.
Hepatic transaminase serum concentrations should be monitored
periodically because of the potential for hepatotoxicity, especially with
phenelzine and isocarboxazid. Elderly persons may be more sensitive to
MAOI adverse effects than are younger adults. MAO activity increases with
age, so MAOI dosages for elderly persons are the same as those required for
younger adults. We know little about using MAOIs in children.
Studies have suggested that transdermal selegiline has antidepressant
properties. Although selegiline is a type B inhibitor at low doses, it becomes
less selective as the dose is increased.

THYROID HORMONES
Thyroid hormones—levothyroxine (Synthroid, Levothroid, Levoxine) and
liothyronine (Cytomel)—are used in psychiatry either alone or as an
augmentation to treat persons with depression or rapid-cycling bipolar I
disorder. They can convert an antidepressant-nonresponsive person into an
antidepressant-responsive person. Thyroid hormones are also used as
replacement therapy for persons treated with lithium (Eskalith) who have
developed a hypothyroid state. Successful use of thyroid hormone as an
intervention for treatment-resistant patients was first reported in the early
1970s. Study results since then have been mixed; however, most show that
patients taking triiodothyronine (T3) are twice as likely to respond to
antidepressant treatment versus placebo. These studies have found that
augmentation with T3 is significant with TCAs and SSRIs. Nevertheless,
many endocrinologists object to the use of thyroid hormones as
antidepressant augmentation agents, citing such risks as osteoporosis and
cardiac arrhythmias.


