<<<PAGE 1194>>>

little girl.” On two occasions, she had inflicted cigarette burns inside her
vagina “to feel something.” She had also engaged in a “brief lesbian
relationship” that ultimately left her “emptier” and guilt ridden;
nonetheless, she now believed that she should burn in hell because she
could not get rid of “obsessing” about the excitement of mutual
cunnilingus with her much older female partner. The patient’s mother,
who owned an art gallery, had been married five times and gave a history
of unmistakable hypomanic episodes; a maternal uncle had died from
alcohol-induced cirrhosis. The patient’s father, a prominent lawyer
known for his “temper and wit,” had committed suicide. The patient was
given phenelzine, eventually raised to 75 mg/day, at which point the
mother described her as “the sweet daughter she was before age 13.” At
her next premenstrual phase, the patient developed insomnia, ran away
from home at night, started “dancing like a go-go girl, met an incredibly
handsome man” of 45 years of age (a pornography shop owner), and had
a clandestine marriage to him. After many dose adjustments, she is now
maintained on a combination of lithium (900 mg/day) and divalproex 750
mg/day. The patient now attends college and has completed four
semesters in art history. In addition to control of her irritable and suicidal
moods, bulimic and migraine attacks have abated considerably. Her
marriage has been annulled on the basis that she was not mentally
competent at the time of the wedding. She is no longer promiscuous and
now expresses fear of intimacy with men that she is attracted to. She is
receiving individual psychotherapy for this problem.
Medical Conditions
In contrast to depressive symptoms, which are present in almost all
psychiatric disorders, manic symptoms are more distinctive. However, a wide
range of medical disorders and substances can cause manic symptoms.
Antidepressant treatment can also be associated with the precipitation of
mania in some patients.

COMORBIDITY
Whereas men more frequently present with substance use disorders, women




<<<PAGE 1305>>>

of severe anxiety symptoms. In those cases, a short-term benzodiazepine,
such as lorazepam or alprazolam, is helpful in the short term. Concurrently,
an SSRI should be started and slowly increased.
For panic disorder, SSRIs or the serotonin–norepinephrine reuptake
inhibitor (SNRI) venlafaxine are first-line options. Tricyclic antidepressants
or MAOIs are effective but less preferably given their side effects. Other
agents, such as mirtazapine, are other second-line options. As mentioned, the
benzodiazepines are effective options but mainly used for short-term use or
exacerbations. Long-term antidepressant therapy is useful for preventing
relapse, with studies suggesting that the beneficial effects last for up to 1 to 3
years. When appropriate, maintenance therapy should be discontinued very
slowly.
For generalized anxiety disorder, the approach is similar, with SSRIs and
SNRIs being the first-line treatments. Reasonable alternatives if those are not
effective include agomelatine, pregabalin, buspirone, and quetiapine.
For social anxiety disorder, the approach is similar to those already
described, with SSRIs and SNRIs being the first-line choice. Pregabalin and
clonazepam also have strong evidence, although the same caveats for other
benzodiazepines apply to clonazepam. Phenelzine is effective as well but is
rarely used because of the side effects. Tricyclic antidepressants, buspirone,
and quetiapine are not recommended owing to their side effects. As noted
above, β-blockers may be useful for performance anxiety. However, their use
does not appear to generalize to other types of social anxiety.
Table 8-6
Evidence-Based Recommendations for Monotherapy of
Anxiety Disorders
Anxiety Disorders
Classes and
Agents

GAD

PD

SAD

SSRIs

First line

First line

First line

SNRIs

First line

First line

First line

TCAs

Second line

Second line

Not




<<<PAGE 1675>>>

Trazodone (Desyrel)b

–

–

Tranylcypromine (Parnate)

+

+

Phenelzine (Nardil)

+

+

Pargyline (Eutonyl)

–

+

Isocarboxazid (Marplan)

–

+

Lithium (Eskalith)

+

+

Amphetamines

+

+

Fluoxetine (Prozac)c

–

+

Fluphenazine (Prolixin)

+

+

Thioridazine (Mellaril)

+

+

Chlorprothixene
(Taractan)

–

+

Mesoridazine (Serentil)

–

+

Perphenazine (Trilafon)

–

+

Trifluoperazine (Stelazine)

–

+

Reserpine (Serpasil)

+

+

Haloperidol (Haldol)

–

+

–

+

Monoamine oxidase inhibitors

Other mood-active drugs

Antipsychoticsd

Antianxiety agente
Chlordiazepoxide
(Librium)
Antihypertensive drugs




<<<PAGE 1679>>>

possibly by dopaminergic activity and increased production of
norepinephrine.
Venlafaxine and the SSRIs most often have adverse effects because of the
rise in serotonin levels. A lowering of the sex drive and difficulty reaching
orgasm occur in both sexes. Cyproheptadine, an antihistamine with
antiserotonergic effects, and methylphenidate, with adrenergic effects, may
reverse those adverse effects. Trazodone is associated with the rare
occurrence of priapism, the symptom of prolonged erection in the absence of
sexual stimuli. That symptom appears to result from the α1-adrenergic
antagonism of trazodone.
Table 16-12
Some Pharmacologic Agents Implicated in Inhibited Female
Orgasma
Tricyclic antidepressants
Imipramine (Tofranil)
Clomipramine (Anafranil)
Nortriptyline (Aventyl)
Monoamine oxidase inhibitors
Tranylcypromine (Parnate)
Phenelzine (Nardil)
Isocarboxazid (Marplan)
Dopamine receptor antagonists
Thioridazine (Mellaril)
Trifluoperazine (Stelazine)
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
Fluoxetine (Prozac)
Paroxetine (Paxil)
Sertraline (Zoloft)
Fluvoxamine (Luvox)
Citalopram (Celexa)
aThe interrelation between female sexual dysfunction and pharmacologic agents has been

less extensively evaluated than male reactions. Oral contraceptives are reported to decrease




<<<PAGE 1880>>>

Thus, blockade of serotonin reuptake by SSRIs can cause nausea and sexual
dysfunction. The D2 blockade of drugs used to treat psychosis can cause
extrapyramidal side effects. Agonist action of benzodiazepine receptors can
cause ataxia and daytime sleepiness. In these cases, additional medications
are frequently used to make the primary agent better tolerated.
Time Course
Adverse effects differ in terms of their onset and duration. Some side effects
appear at the outset of treatment and then rapidly diminish. Nausea occurring
with SSRIs or venlafaxine (Effexor) and sedation occurring with mirtazapine
(Remeron) are good examples of early, time-limited side effects. Early-onset,
but persistent, side effects include a dry mouth that is associated with
noradrenergic reuptake inhibition or antimuscarinic activity. Some side
effects appear later in treatment (late-appearing side effects) and, sometimes
may be just the opposite of adverse events early in treatment. For example,
patients may typically lose weight during early treatment with SSRIs, only to
find, over time, a reversal occurs, so that they gain weight.
Similarly, early activation or agitation may be followed by constant fatigue
or apathy. Because most data about new drugs come from short-term studies,
generally 8 weeks in duration, early-onset side effects are overrepresented in
product information and descriptions of newly marketed information.
Clinicians must follow the letters to the editor sections of journals and other
sources of information to update their understanding of the real side effect
profile of a drug.
Adverse effects differ in their impact on compliance and the potential to
cause harm. Depending on a patient’s threshold of tolerance for a side effect
and the impact on the quality of life, side effects can lead to drug
discontinuation. Examples of serious side effects include agranulocytosis
(clozapine), Stevens–Johnson syndrome (lamotrigine [Lamictal]), hepatic
failure (nefazodone [Serzone]), stroke (phenelzine [Nardil]), and heart block
(thioridazine [Mellaril]). Overall, the risk of life-threatening side effects with
psychotropics is low. Drugs that carry such a risk should be monitored more
closely, and the prescribing physician should take into account whether the
potential clinical benefits justify the additional risk. Any drug with a serious
risk, as reflected in a black box warning, is generally used less extensively




<<<PAGE 1982>>>

OCD as a genetically determined, lifelong condition that is best treated
continuously with drugs and cognitive-behavioral therapy from the onset of
symptoms in childhood throughout the lifespan.
SSRI dosages for OCD may need to be higher than those required to treat
depression. Although some responses can be seen in the first few weeks of
treatment, it may take several months for the maximum effects to become
evident. Patients who fail to obtain adequate relief of their OCD symptoms
with an SSRI will usually benefit from the addition of a small dose of
risperidone (Risperdal). Apart from the extrapyramidal side effects of
risperidone, patients should be monitored for increases in prolactin levels
when this combination is used. Clinically, hyperprolactinemia may manifest
as gynecomastia and galactorrhea (in both men and women) and loss of
menses.
Several disorders are now considered to be within the OCD spectrum. This
spectrum includes several conditions and symptoms characterized by
nonsuicidal self-mutilation, such as trichotillomania, eyebrow picking, nose
picking, nail-biting, compulsive picking of skin blemishes, and cutting.
Patients with these behaviors benefit from treatment with SSRIs. Other
spectrum disorders include compulsive gambling, compulsive shopping,
hypochondriasis, and body dysmorphic disorder.
PANIC DISORDER. Paroxetine, fluoxetine, and sertraline are indicated for the

treatment of panic disorder, with or without agoraphobia. These agents work
less rapidly than do benzodiazepines but are far superior to them for the
treatment of panic disorder with comorbid depression. Citalopram and
fluvoxamine also may reduce spontaneous or induced panic attacks. Because
fluoxetine can initially heighten anxiety symptoms, persons with panic
disorder must begin taking small dosages (5 mg a day) and increase the
dosage slowly. Low doses of benzodiazepines may be given to manage this
side effect.
SOCIAL ANXIETY DISORDER. SSRIs are effective agents in the treatment of

social phobia. They reduce both symptoms and disability. The response rate
is comparable to that seen with the MAOI phenelzine (Nardil), the previous
standard treatment. The SSRIs are safer to use than MAOIs or
benzodiazepines.




<<<PAGE 2011>>>

increases in dose should never exceed 100 mg in 3 days; a single dose of
immediate-release bupropion should never exceed 150 mg, and the total daily
dosage should not exceed 450 mg. The maximum of 400 mg of the sustainedrelease version should be used as a twice-a-day regimen of either 200 mg
twice daily or 300 mg in the morning and 100 mg in the afternoon. A starting
dosage of the sustained-release version, 100 mg once a day, can be increased
to 100 mg twice a day after 4 days. Then 150 mg twice a day may be used. A
single dose of sustained-release bupropion should never exceed 300 mg. The
maximum dosage is 200 mg twice a day of the immediate-release or
extended-release formulations. An advantage of the extended-release
preparation is that the patient can take a single daily dose of 450 mg after
proper titration.
For smoking cessation, the patient should start taking 150 mg a day of
sustained-release bupropion 10 to 14 days before quitting smoking. On the
fourth day, the dosage should be increased to 150 mg twice daily. Treatment
generally lasts 7 to 12 weeks.

MIRTAZAPINE
Mirtazapine (Remeron) is unique among drugs used to treat major depression
in that it increases both norepinephrine and serotonin through a mechanism
other than reuptake blockade (as in the case of tricyclic agents or SSRIs) or
monoamine oxidase inhibition (as in the case of phenelzine or
tranylcypromine). Mirtazapine is also more likely to reduce rather than cause
nausea and diarrhea, the result of its effects on serotonin 5-HT3 receptors.
Characteristic side effects include increased appetite and sedation.
Pharmacologic Actions
Mirtazapine is administered orally and is rapidly and completely absorbed. It
has a half-life of about 30 hours. Peak concentration is achieved within 2
hours of ingestion, and steady state is reached after 6 days. Plasma clearance
may be slowed up to 30 percent in persons with impaired hepatic function, up
to 50 percent in those with impaired renal function, up to 40 percent slower in
older men, and up to 10 percent slower in older women.
The mechanism of action of mirtazapine is the antagonism of central




<<<PAGE 2034>>>

used as a treatment for tuberculosis, but its antidepressant properties were
discovered by chance when some treated patients experienced elevation of
mood during treatment. Despite their effectiveness, prescription of MAOIs as
first-line agents has always been limited by concern about the development of
potentially lethal hypertension and the consequent need for a restrictive diet.
The use of MAOIs declined further after the introduction of the SSRIs and
other new agents. They are now mainly relegated to use in treatment-resistant
cases. Thus, the second-line status of MAOIs has less to do with
considerations of efficacy than with safety concerns. The currently available
MAOIs
include
phenelzine
(Nardil),
isocarboxazid
(Marplan),
tranylcypromine (Parnate), rasagiline (Azilect), moclobemide (Manerix), and
selegiline (Eldepryl).
Two subsequent advances in the field of antidepressant MAOIs involve the
introduction of a selective reversible inhibitor of MAOA (RIMA),
moclobemide (Manerix), in the early 1990s into most countries except the
United States, and in 2005, the introduction of a transdermal delivery form of
selegiline (Emsam) in the United States that is used for the treatment of
parkinsonism. Other RIMA agents, including brofaromine (Consonar) and
befloxatone, have not been submitted for registration despite favorable
outcomes in clinical trials.
Pharmacologic Actions
Phenelzine, tranylcypromine, and isocarboxazid are readily absorbed after
oral administration and reach peak plasma concentrations within 2 hours.
Whereas their plasma half-lives are in the range of 2 to 3 hours, their tissue
half-lives are considerably longer. Because they irreversibly inactivate
MAOs, the therapeutic effect of a single dose of irreversible MAOIs may
persist for as long as 2 weeks. The RIMA moclobemide is rapidly absorbed
and has a half-life of 0.5 to 3.5 hours. Because it is a reversible inhibitor,
moclobemide has a much briefer clinical effect after a single dose than do
irreversible MAOIs.
The MAO enzymes are found on the outer membranes of mitochondria,
where they degrade cytoplasmic and extraneuronal monoamine
neurotransmitters such as norepinephrine, serotonin, dopamine, epinephrine,
and tyramine. MAOIs act in the CNS, the sympathetic nervous system, the




<<<PAGE 2035>>>

liver, and the GI tract. There are two types of MAOs, MAOA and MAOB.
MAOA primarily metabolizes norepinephrine, serotonin, and epinephrine;
both MAOA and MAOB metabolize dopamine and tyramine.
The structures of phenelzine and tranylcypromine are similar to those of
amphetamine and have similar pharmacologic effects in that they increase the
release of dopamine and norepinephrine with attendant stimulant effects on
the brain.
Therapeutic Indications
MAOIs are used for the treatment of depression. Some research indicates that
phenelzine is more effective than TCAs in depressed patients with mood
reactivity, extreme sensitivity to interpersonal loss or rejection, prominent
anergia, hyperphagia, and hypersomnia—a constellation of symptoms
conceptualized as atypical depression. Evidence also suggests that MAOIs
are more effective than TCAs as a treatment for bipolar depression.
Patients with panic disorder and social phobia respond well to MAOIs.
MAOIs have also been used to treat bulimia nervosa, PTSD, anginal pain,
atypical facial pain, migraine, ADHD, idiopathic orthostatic hypotension, and
depression associated with traumatic brain injury.
Precautions and Adverse Reactions
The most frequent adverse effects of MAOIs are orthostatic hypotension,
insomnia, weight gain, edema, and sexual dysfunction. Orthostatic
hypotension can lead to dizziness and falls. Thus, cautious upward tapering
of the dosage should be used to determine the maximum tolerable dosage.
Treatment for orthostatic hypotension includes avoidance of caffeine; intake
of 2 L of fluid per day; addition of dietary salt or adjustment of
antihypertensive drugs (if applicable); support stockings; and in severe cases,
treatment with fludrocortisone (Florinef), a mineralocorticoid, 0.1 to 0.2 mg a
day. Orthostatic hypotension associated with tranylcypromine use can usually
be relieved by dividing the daily dosage.
Insomnia can be treated by dividing the dose, not giving the medication
after dinner, and using a benzodiazepine hypnotic if necessary. Weight gain,
edema, and sexual dysfunction often do not respond to any treatment and
may warrant switching to another agent. When switching from one MAOI to




<<<PAGE 2041>>>

urinary metanephrine concentrations and may cause a false-positive test
result for pheochromocytoma or neuroblastoma. MAOIs have been reported
to be associated with a minimal false elevation in thyroid function test results.
Dosage and Clinical Guidelines
There is no definitive rationale for choosing one irreversible MAOI over
another. Table 21-24 lists MAOI preparations and typical dosages.
Phenelzine use should begin with a test dose of 15 mg on the first day. The
dosage can be increased to 15 mg three times daily during the first week and
increased by 15 mg a day each week after that until the dosage of 90 mg a
day, in divided doses, is reached by the end of the fourth week.
Tranylcypromine and isocarboxazid use should begin with a test dosage of 10
mg and may be increased to 10 mg three times daily by the end of the first
week. Many clinicians and researchers have recommended upper limits of 50
mg a day for isocarboxazid and 40 mg a day for tranylcypromine.
Administration of tranylcypromine in multiple small daily doses may reduce
its hypotensive effects.
Table 21-24
Typical Dosage Forms and Recommended Dosages for
Currently Available Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors
Drug

Usual Dose
(mg/day)

Maximum Dose Dosage (Oral)
(mg/day)
Formulation

Isocarboxazid
(Marplan)

20–40

60

10-mg tablets

Phenelzine
(Nardil)

30–60

90

15-mg tablets

Tranylcypromine
(Parnate)

20–60

60

10-mg tablets

Rasagiline

0.5–1.0

1.0

0.5- or 1.0-mg
tablets

Selegiline

10

30

5-mg tablets




<<<PAGE 2042>>>

(Eldepryl)
Moclobemide
(Manerix)

300–600

600

100- or 150-mg
tablets

Even though coadministration of MAOIs with TCAs, SSRIs, or lithium is
generally contraindicated, these combinations have been used successfully
and safely to treat patients with refractory depression. However, they should
be used with extreme caution.
Hepatic transaminase serum concentrations should be monitored
periodically because of the potential for hepatotoxicity, especially with
phenelzine and isocarboxazid. Elderly persons may be more sensitive to
MAOI adverse effects than are younger adults. MAO activity increases with
age, so MAOI dosages for elderly persons are the same as those required for
younger adults. We know little about using MAOIs in children.
Studies have suggested that transdermal selegiline has antidepressant
properties. Although selegiline is a type B inhibitor at low doses, it becomes
less selective as the dose is increased.

THYROID HORMONES
Thyroid hormones—levothyroxine (Synthroid, Levothroid, Levoxine) and
liothyronine (Cytomel)—are used in psychiatry either alone or as an
augmentation to treat persons with depression or rapid-cycling bipolar I
disorder. They can convert an antidepressant-nonresponsive person into an
antidepressant-responsive person. Thyroid hormones are also used as
replacement therapy for persons treated with lithium (Eskalith) who have
developed a hypothyroid state. Successful use of thyroid hormone as an
intervention for treatment-resistant patients was first reported in the early
1970s. Study results since then have been mixed; however, most show that
patients taking triiodothyronine (T3) are twice as likely to respond to
antidepressant treatment versus placebo. These studies have found that
augmentation with T3 is significant with TCAs and SSRIs. Nevertheless,
many endocrinologists object to the use of thyroid hormones as
antidepressant augmentation agents, citing such risks as osteoporosis and
cardiac arrhythmias.




<<<PAGE 2228>>>

seizure disorder. Amantadine should be used with caution in persons with
edema or cardiovascular disease. Some evidence indicates that amantadine is
teratogenic and, therefore, should not be taken by pregnant women. Because
amantadine is excreted in breast milk, breastfeeding women should not take
the drug.
Suicide attempts with amantadine overdosages are life-threatening.
Symptoms can include toxic psychoses (confusion, hallucinations,
aggressiveness) and cardiopulmonary arrest. Emergency treatment beginning
with gastric lavage is indicated.
Drug Interactions. Coadministration of amantadine with phenelzine
(Nardil) or other MAOIs can result in a significant increase in resting BP.
The coadministration of amantadine with CNS stimulants can result in
insomnia, irritability, nervousness, and possibly seizures or irregular
heartbeat. Amantadine should not be coadministered with anticholinergics
because unwanted side effects—such as confusion, hallucinations,
nightmares, dry mouth, and blurred vision—may be exacerbated.
Dosage and Clinical Guidelines. Amantadine is available in 100-mg
capsules and as a 50-mg/5-mL syrup. The usual starting dosage of
amantadine is 100 mg given twice a day orally, although the dosage can be
cautiously increased up to 200 mg given twice a day orally if indicated.
Amantadine should be used in persons with renal impairment only in
consultation with the physician treating the renal condition. If amantadine is
successful in the treatment of the drug-induced extrapyramidal symptoms, it
should be continued for 4 to 6 weeks and then discontinued to see whether
the person has become tolerant to the neurologic adverse effects of the
antipsychotic medication. Amantadine should be tapered over 1 to 2 weeks
after a decision has been made to discontinue the drug. Persons taking
amantadine should not drink alcoholic beverages.

DRUGS TO TREAT PSYCHOTROPIC-INDUCED WEIGHT
GAIN
Weight management is a critical element of psychotropic drug treatment
because obesity is common among persons with mental disorders. Thus,




<<<PAGE 2265>>>

Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive
Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Vol. 2. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins; 2009:3184.
Thase ME, Haight BR, Richard N, Rockett CB, Mitton M. Remission rates
following antidepressant therapy with bupropion or selective reuptake
inhibitors: a meta-analysis of original data from 7 randomized controlled
trials. J Clin Psychiatry. 2005;66:974–981.
Thase ME, Pritchett YL, Ossanna MJ, Swindle RW, Xu J. Efficacy of
duloxetine and selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors: comparisons as
assessed by remission rates in patients with major depressive disorder. J
Clin Psychopharmacol. 2007;27:672–676.
Tremblay P, Blier P. Catecholaminergic strategies for the treatment of major
depression. Curr Drug Targets. 2006;7:149.
Trivedi MH, Rush AJ, Wisniewski SR, Nierenberg AA, Warden D, Ritz L,
Norquist G, Howland RH, Lebowitz B, McGrath PJ, Shores-Wilson K,
Biggs MM, Balasubramani GK, Fava M, STAR*D Study Team.
Evaluation of outcomes with citalopram for depression using
measurement-based care in STAR*D: implications for clinical practice.
Am J Psychiatry. 2006;163:28–40.
Tulen JH, Volkers AC, van den Broek WW, Bruijn JA. Sustained effects of
phenelzine and tranylcypromine on orthostatic challenge in antidepressantrefractory depression. J Clin Psychopharmacol. 2006;26:542–544.
Van Ameringen M, Mancini C, Oakman J. Nefazodone in the treatment of
generalized social phobia: a randomized, placebo-controlled trial. J Clin
Psychiatry. 2007;
68(2):288–295.
Verena H, Mergl R, Allgaier AK, Kohnen R, Möller HJ. Treatment of
depression with atypical features: a meta-analytic approach. Psychiatry
Res. 2006;141:89–101.
Weissman AM, Levy BT, Hartz, AJ, Bentler S, Donohue M. Pooled analysis
of antidepressant levels in lactating mothers, breast milk, and nursing
infants. Am J Psychiatry. 2004;161:1066.
Whitmyer VG, Dunner DL, Kornstein SG, Meyers AL, Mallinckrodt CH. A
comparison of initial duloxetine dosing strategies in patients with major
depressive disorder. J Clin Psychiatry. 2007;68:1921.
Wilens TE, Spencer TJ, Biederman J, Girard K, Doyle R. A controlled




<<<PAGE 2266>>>

clinical trial of bupropion for attention deficit hyperactivity disorder in
adults. Am J Psychiatry. 2001;158(2):282.
Wood PL, Khan MA, Moskal JR, Todd KG, Tanay VAMI. Aldehyde load in
ischemia-reperfusion injury: neuroprotection by neutralization of reactive
aldehydes with phenelzine. Brain Res. 2006;184–190.
Xu JJ, Henstock PV, Dunn MC, Smith AR, Chabot JR, de Graaf D. Cellular
imaging predictions of clinical drug-induced liver injury. Toxicol Sci.
2008;105(1):97–105.
Yoshimura M, Furue H. Mechanisms for the anti-nociceptive actions of the
descending noradrenergic and serotonergic systems in the spinal cord. J
Pharmacol Sci. 2006;101:107–117.
Zanos P, Gould T D. “Mechanisms of ketamine action as an antidepressant.”
Mol
Psychiatry.
2018;23(4):
801–811.
https://doi.org/10.1038/mp.2017.255.
Zisook S, Rush AJ, Haight BR, Clines DC, Rockett CB. Use of bupropion in
combination with serotonin reuptake inhibitors. Biol Psychiatry.
2006;59(3):203–210.
Mood Stabilizers
Alvarez G, Marsh W, Camacho IA, Gracia SL. Effectiveness and tolerability
of carbamazepine vs. oxcarbazepine as mood stabilizers. Clin Res Reg
Affairs. 2003;20:365.
Atmaca M, Ozdemir H, Cetinkaya S, Parmaksiz S, Poyraz AK. Cingulate
gyrus volumetry in drug free bipolar patients and patients treated with
valproate or valproate and quetiapine. J Psychiatr Res. 2007;41:821–827.
Atmaca M, Yildirim H, Ozdemir H, Ogur E, Tezcan E. Hippocampal 1H
MRS in patients with bipolar disorder taking valproate versus valproate
plus quetiapine. Psychol Med. 2007;37:121–129.
Bachmann RF, Schloesser RJ, Gould TD, Manji HK. Mood stabilizers target
cellular plasticity and resilience cascades. Mol Neurobiol. 2005;32:173–
202.
Bauer M, Grof P, Müller-Oerlinghausen B. Lithium in Neuropsychiatry: The
Comprehensive Guide. Oxon, UK: Informa UK; 2006.
Bearden CE, Thompson PM, Dalwani M, Hayashi KM, Lee AD. Greater
cortical gray matter density in lithium-treated patients with bipolar
disorder. Biol Psychiatry. 2007;62:7–16.




<<<PAGE 2578>>>

term management
may include an
antidepressant
Parkinsonism

Stiffness, tremor,
bradykinesia,
flattened affect,
shuffling gait,
salivation,
secondary to
antipsychotic
medication

Oral antiparkinsonian
drug for 4 wk to 3 mo;
decrease dosage of
the antipsychotic

Perioral (rabbit) tremor

Perioral tumor
Decrease dosage or
(rabbit-like facial
change to a
grimacing) usually
medication in another
appearing after
class
long-term therapy
with
antipsychotics

Phencyclidine (or
phencyclidine-like
intoxication)

Psychosis; can lead Serum and urine assay;
to death; acute
benzodiazepines may
danger to self and
interfere with
others
excretion;
antipsychotics may
worsen symptoms
because of
anticholinergic side
effects; medical
monitoring and
hospitalization for
severe intoxication

Phenelzine-induced
psychotic disorder

Psychosis and
mania in
predisposed
people

Reduce dosage or
discontinue drug




<<<PAGE 3694>>>

diagnosis, 491, 493t
differential diagnosis, 509
hypocretin (orexin) deficit and, 491
psychiatric disorders with, 509, 510t
test findings in, 503, 505
treatment for, 512–513
Narcotic Anonymous (NA), 7, 296
Nardil. See Phenelzine
Narrative medicine, 781–783
Narrative psychotherapy, 781–783
character in, 782
future directions, 783
metaphor in, 782
plot in, 782
Narrow-band personality tests, 56
National Alliance on Mental Illness (NAMI), 356–357, 871
National Ambulatory Medical Care Survey, 1051
National Comorbidity Study (NCS), 1050
National Comorbidity Study Replication (NCS-R), 1050
National Comorbidity Survey (NCS), 868
National Comorbidity Survey-Replication (NCS-R), 868
National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws, 847
National Institute for Mental Health Diagnostic Interview Schedule for
Children Version IV (NIMH DISC-IV), 75
National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, 589, 898
National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA), 273, 274, 886
National Institutes of Mental Health (NIMH), 263
National Survey of Drug Use and Health (NSDUH), 274
National Vietnam Veteran Longitudinal Study (NVVLS), 435
National Vietnam Veterans Readjustment Study (NVVRS), 435
NCS. See National Comorbidity Study (NCS)
NCS-R. See National Comorbidity Study Replication (NCS-R)
Nefazodone, 593, 638
dosage and clinical guidelines, 639
drug interactions and laboratory interferences, 639
pharmacologic actions, 638
precautions and adverse reactions, 638–639, 639t




<<<PAGE 3714>>>

Personality disorders, 560–579. See also specific disorders
assessment of, 45
clinical presentation, 560–561
comorbidity, 568–569
course and prognosis, 569–570
diagnosis, 561, 561t
differential diagnosis, 567–568
DSM-5 on, 561, 561t
Cluster A, 561, 561t, 562–563, 575
Cluster B, 561, 561t, 563–565, 575
Cluster C, 561, 561t, 565–566, 575
epidemiology, 574–575
etiology, 575–579
biologic factors, 575–576
genetic factors, 575
psychoanalytic factors, 576–577
temperament, 577–579
ICD-10, 561, 561t
treatment approach, 570–574
16 Personality Factor Questionnaire (16 PF), 58t
Personality, theories of, 1057–1093
Personal notes, 27
Person-centered interview, 3–4
Petit mal epilepsy, 250, 251f
PFC. See Prefrontal Cortex (PFC)
Pharmacodynamics, 591–592
Pharmacogenetic research, 592, 601
Pharmacokinetics, 591–592
drug interactions, 601
Pharmacotherapy, for adjustment disorder, 435
Pharmacotherapy, sleep rhythms and, 1004–1005
Phencyclidine (PCP), 319, 320, 320t, 325
intoxication, 324
Phendimetrazine, 302, 708
Phenelzine, 593, 628
Phenethylamines, 319–320
Phenobarbital, 253t, 298


