<<<PAGE 583>>>

of its effect. In another trial comparing risperidone and sodium valproate
treatment for bipolar disorder in youth, risperidone had more rapid
improvement and a higher final reduction in manic symptoms compared to
sodium valproate.
Mood-stabilizing agents have been used in open trials and anecdotally with
early-onset bipolar illness with little evidence of efficacy at this time. In trials
using lithium or sodium valproate for the treatment of early-onset bipolar
disorder, responses were less robust compared to results with atypical
antipsychotics. Controlled trials have provided some evidence suggesting that
lithium is efficacious in the management of aggression behavior disorders.
Although lithium is approved for adolescent mania, more research is needed
to know if lithium is useful for more classic forms of mania in adolescents.
The Collaborative Lithium Trials (CoLT) established a set of protocols to
establish the safety and potential efficacy of lithium in youth, and to develop
studies to provide evidence-based dosing of lithium for youth. A group of
researchers studied the first-dose pharmacokinetics of lithium carbonate in
youth and found that clearance and volume correlate with total body weight
in youth, and particularly with fat-free mass. The difference in body size was
consistent with the pharmacokinetics of lithium metabolism in children and
adults. An open-label trial of lamotrigine in the treatment of bipolar
depression among youth provides possible support for its use in children and
adolescents.
Current evidence suggests a faster response and a more robust effect with
atypical antipsychotics compared to mood-stabilizing agents in the treatment
of early-onset bipolar disorder. However, given the severity and impairment
of bipolar disorder in youth, when there is only partial recovery, we should
consider adding another agent.
Psychosocial Treatment
Psychosocial treatment interventions for early-onset bipolar illness have
included a family-focused treatment. This treatment consists of several
sessions of psychoeducation, then sessions focusing on current stressors and a
mood management plan, and then several sessions of communication
enhancement training and problem-solving skills training. The use of this
type of intervention for youths diagnosed with bipolar disorder or at risk (by




<<<PAGE 1199>>>

Combination therapy: lithium or divalproex +
haloperidol, lithium + carbamazepine,
adjunctive tamoxifen
Not
Monotherapy: gabapentin, topiramate, lamotrigine,
recommended
verapamil, tiagabine
Combination therapy: risperidone +
carbamazepine, olanzapine + carbamazepine
ECT, electroconvulsive therapy; XR or ER, extended release.
Modified from CANMAT/ISBD Guidelines.

Table 6-6 lists some recommended medications for treating acute mania.
Adherence to treatment, however, is often a problem because patients with
mania frequently lack insight into their illness and refuse to take medication.
Because impaired judgment, impulsivity, and aggressiveness combine to put
the patient or others at risk, we must medicate patients when we need to
protect themselves and others from harm.
INITIAL MEDICATION SELECTION. Figure 6-2 diagrams a strategy for selecting

and preparing a bipolar patient for pharmacotherapy.
Acute Mania. The treatment of acute mania, or hypomania, usually is the
most straightforward phase to treat. We can use agents alone or in
combination to bring the patient down from a high.
Lithium Carbonate. Lithium carbonate is considered the prototypical mood
stabilizer. However, because the onset of antimanic action with lithium can
be slow, we often supplement it in the early phases of treatment by atypical
antipsychotics, mood-stabilizing anticonvulsants, or high-potency
benzodiazepines. Therapeutic lithium levels are between 0.6 and 1.2 mEq/L.
The acute use of lithium has been limited in recent years by its unpredictable
efficacy, problematic side effects, and the need for frequent laboratory tests.
The introduction of newer drugs with more favorable side effects, lower
toxicity, and less need for frequent laboratory testing has resulted in a decline
in lithium use. For many patients, however, its clinical benefits can be
remarkable.




<<<PAGE 1200>>>

Anticonvulsants. Valproate (valproic acid or divalproex sodium) has
surpassed lithium in use for acute mania. Unlike lithium, valproate is only
indicated for acute mania, although most experts agree it also has
prophylactic effects. Normal dose levels of valproic acid are 750 to 2,500
mg/day, achieving blood levels between 50 and 120 µg/mL. Rapid oral
loading with 15 to 20 mg/kg of divalproex sodium from day 1 of treatment
has been well tolerated and associated with a rapid onset of response. Some
laboratory testing is required during valproate treatment.
Carbamazepine has been used worldwide for decades as a first-line
treatment for acute mania. The FDA approved it for acute mania in the
United States in 2004. Typical doses of carbamazepine to treat acute mania
range between 600 and 1,800 mg/day associated with blood levels of between
4 and 12 µg/mL. The keto congener of carbamazepine, oxcarbazepine, is
better tolerated than carbamazepine, but the data for its efficacy are
conflicting. A Cochrane review concluded there is insufficient evidence for
this medication in acute mania.
Antipsychotics. The FDA approved many of the atypical antipsychotics for
use in bipolar disorder. We list them in Table 6-7. Compared with older
agents, such as haloperidol and chlorpromazine, atypical antipsychotics have
a lesser liability for excitatory postsynaptic potential and tardive dyskinesia;
many do not increase prolactin. However, many of them have the risk of
weight gain with its associated medical problems. Some patients, however,
require maintenance treatment with antipsychotic medication.
Acute Bipolar Depression
Lithium. There is limited evidence for lithium in bipolar depression. Early
studies were promising, but later placebo-controlled studies did not confirm
lithium’s efficacy. More extensive studies that included lithium did suggest
that lithium was at least as useful as other mood stabilizers for bipolar
depression.
Anticonvulsants. The most promising anticonvulsant has been lamotrigine,
which has several reasonable studies showing efficacy for bipolar depression.
Its major limitation is that it must be titrated gradually to prevent a severe




<<<PAGE 2047>>>

the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor and may have action on serotonin HT3 as
well. The mechanism of its antidepressant effect is not clear, as other positive
allosteric modulators of GABAA, such as benzodiazepines, do not have a
significant antidepressant effect. However, like ketamine, it provides a rapid
response in patients who respond to the drug, usually within 2 to 3 days. We
know little about the long term efficacy of the drug.
The drug is marketed under the brand name Zulresso and is a Schedule IV
controlled substance. It is only available through a national registry and has
several other drawbacks limiting its widespread acceptance. One is its long
administration time, as the drug must be given by continuous IV infusion
over 60 hours, during which the dose is slowly increased. This extended
hospitalization is to prevent excess sedation or syncope.
Perhaps the most significant drawback of the medication is its cost.
Currently, the drug costs about $34,000 for a single dose, as well as the price
of remaining in a medical facility for 60 hours, and is not currently covered
by most insurance companies.

21.3 Mood Stabilizers
LITHIUM
The effectiveness of lithium for mania and the prophylactic treatment of
manic–depressive disorder was established in the early 1950s as a result of
research done by John F.J. Cade, an Australian psychiatrist. Concerns about
toxicity limited initial acceptance of lithium use in the United States, but its
use increased gradually in the late 1960s. It was not until 1970 that the FDA
approved its labeling for the treatment of mania. The only other approved
FDA indication came in 1974 when it was accepted as maintenance therapy
in patients with a history of mania. For several decades, lithium was the only
drug approved for both acute and maintenance treatment. It is also used as an
adjunctive medication in the treatment of MDD.
Lithium (Li), a monovalent ion, is a member of the group IA alkali metals
on the periodic table, a group that also includes sodium, potassium, rubidium,
cesium, and francium. Lithium exists in nature as both 6Li (7.42 percent) and




<<<PAGE 2048>>>

7Li (92.58 percent). The latter isotope allows the imaging of lithium by

magnetic resonance spectroscopy. Some 300 mg of lithium is contained in
1,597 mg of lithium carbonate (Li2CO3). Most lithium used in the United
States is obtained from dry lake mining in Chile and Argentina.
Pharmacologic Actions
Lithium is rapidly and completely absorbed after oral administration, with
peak serum concentrations occurring in 1 to 1.5 hours with standard
preparations and in 4 to 4.5 hours with slow-release and controlled-release
preparations. Lithium does not bind to plasma proteins, is not metabolized,
and is excreted through the kidneys. The plasma half-life is initially 1.3 days
and is 2.4 days after administration for more than 1 year. The blood–brain
barrier permits only the slow passage of lithium, which is why a single
overdose does not necessarily cause toxicity and why long-term lithium
intoxication is slow to resolve. The elimination half-life of lithium is 18 to 24
hours in young adults but is shorter in children and more prolonged in elderly
persons. Renal clearance of lithium is decreased with renal insufficiency.
Equilibrium is reached after 5 to 7 days of regular intake. Obesity is
associated with higher rates of lithium clearance. The excretion of lithium is
complex during pregnancy; excretion increases during pregnancy but
decreases after delivery. Lithium is excreted in breast milk and insignificant
amounts in the feces and sweat. Thyroid and renal concentrations of lithium
are higher than serum levels.
An explanation for the mood-stabilizing effects of lithium remains elusive.
Theories include alterations of ion transport and effects on neurotransmitters
and neuropeptides, signal transduction pathways, and second messenger
systems.
Therapeutic Indications
Bipolar I Disorder
MANIC EPISODES. Lithium controls acute mania and prevents relapse in about
80 percent of persons with bipolar I disorder and in a somewhat smaller
percentage of persons with mixed (mania and depression) episodes, rapidcycling bipolar disorder, or mood changes in encephalopathy. Lithium has a




<<<PAGE 2049>>>

relatively slow onset of action when used and exerts its antimanic effects over
1 to 3 weeks. Thus, a benzodiazepine, DRA, SDA, or valproic acid is usually
administered for the first few weeks. Patients with mixed or dysphoric mania,
rapid cycling, comorbid substance abuse, or organicity respond less well to
lithium than those with classic mania.
BIPOLAR DEPRESSION. Lithium is effective in the treatment of depression

associated with bipolar I disorder, as well as in the role of add-on therapy for
patients with severe MDD. Augmentation of lithium therapy with valproic
acid (Depakene) or carbamazepine (Tegretol) is usually well tolerated, with
little risk of precipitation of mania.
When a depressive episode occurs in a person taking maintenance lithium,
the differential diagnosis should include lithium-induced hypothyroidism,
substance abuse, and lack of compliance with lithium therapy. One approach
is to increase the lithium concentration (up to 1 to 1.2 mEq/L). Alternately we
may augment with valproate or carbamazepine. It may also help to add
supplemental thyroid hormone (e.g., 25 µg a day of liothyronine [Cytomel]),
even in the presence of normal findings on thyroid function tests.
Antidepressants or ECT are sometimes added judiciously. After the acute
depressive episode resolves, other therapies should be tapered in favor of
lithium monotherapy, if clinically tolerated.
MAINTENANCE. Maintenance treatment with lithium markedly decreases the

frequency, severity, and duration of manic and depressive episodes in persons
with bipolar I disorder. Lithium provides relatively more effective
prophylaxis for mania than for depression, and supplemental antidepressant
strategies may be necessary either intermittently or continuously. Lithium
maintenance is almost always indicated after the first episode of bipolar I
disorder, depression or mania, and should be considered after the first episode
for adolescents or for persons who have a family history of bipolar I disorder.
Others who benefit from lithium maintenance are those who have poor
support systems, had no precipitating factors for the first episode, have a high
suicide risk, had a sudden onset of the first episode, or had a first episode of
mania. Clinical studies have shown that lithium reduces the incidence of
suicide in bipolar I disorder patients six- or sevenfold. Lithium is also an
effective treatment for persons with severe cyclothymic disorder.




<<<PAGE 2050>>>

It is wise to initiate maintenance therapy after the first manic episode,
based on several observations. First, each episode of mania increases the risk
of subsequent episodes. Second, among people responsive to lithium,
relapses are 28 times more likely after lithium use is discontinued. Third, case
reports describe persons who initially responded to lithium, discontinued
taking it, and then had a relapse but no longer responded to lithium in
subsequent episodes. Continued maintenance treatment with lithium is often
associated with increased efficacy and reduced mortality. Therefore, an
episode of depression or mania that occurs after a relatively short time on
lithium maintenance does not necessarily represent treatment failure.
However, lithium treatment alone may begin to lose its effectiveness after
several years of successful use. If this occurs, then supplemental treatment
with carbamazepine or valproate may be useful.
Maintenance lithium dosages can often be adjusted to achieve plasma
concentration somewhat lower than that needed for the treatment of acute
mania. If lithium use is to be discontinued, then the dosage should be slowly
tapered. Abrupt discontinuation of lithium therapy is associated with an
increased risk of recurrence of manic and depressive episodes.
Major Depressive Disorder. Lithium is effective in the long-term
treatment of major depression, but it is not more effective than antidepressant
drugs. The most common role for lithium in MDD is as an adjuvant to
antidepressant use in persons who have failed to respond to the
antidepressants alone. About 50 to 60 percent of antidepressant
nonresponders do respond when lithium, 300 mg three times daily, is added
to the antidepressant regimen. In some cases, a response may be seen within
days, but most often, several weeks are required to see the efficacy of the
regimen. Lithium alone may effectively treat depressed persons who have
bipolar I disorder but have not yet had their first manic episode. Lithium has
been reported to be effective in persons with MDD whose disorder has
marked cyclicity.
Schizoaffective Disorder and Schizophrenia. Persons with prominent
mood symptoms—either bipolar type or depressive type—with
schizoaffective disorder are more likely to respond to lithium than those with
predominant psychotic symptoms. Although SDAs and DRAs are the




<<<PAGE 2056>>>

abnormal heartbeat and other symptoms (such as severe dizziness, fainting,
shortness of breath) that need medical attention right away. Before starting
lithium treatment, clinicians should ask about known heart conditions,
unexplained fainting, and family history of problems or sudden unexplained
death before age 45.
Gastrointestinal Effects. GI symptoms—which include nausea,
decreased appetite, vomiting, and diarrhea—can be diminished by dividing
the dosage, administering the lithium with food, or switching to another
lithium preparation. The lithium preparation least likely to cause diarrhea is
lithium citrate. Some lithium preparations contain lactose, which can cause
diarrhea in lactose-intolerant persons. Persons taking slow-release
formulations of lithium who experience diarrhea caused by unabsorbed
medication in the lower part of the GI tract may experience less diarrhea than
with standard-release preparations. Diarrhea may also respond to
antidiarrheal preparations such as loperamide (Imodium, Kaopectate),
bismuth subsalicylate (Pepto-Bismol), or diphenoxylate with atropine
(Lomotil).
Weight Gain. Weight gain results from a poorly understood effect of
lithium on carbohydrate metabolism. Weight gain can also result from
lithium-induced hypothyroidism, lithium-induced edema, or excessive
consumption of soft drinks and juices to quench lithium-induced thirst.
Neurologic Effects
TREMOR. A lithium-induced postural tremor may occur that is usually 8 to 12
Hz and is most notable in outstretched hands, especially in the fingers, and
during tasks involving fine manipulations. The tremor can be reduced by
dividing the daily dosage, using a sustained-release formulation, reducing
caffeine intake, reassessing the concomitant use of other medicines, and
treating comorbid anxiety. β-Adrenergic receptor antagonists, such as
propranolol, 30 to 120 mg a day in divided doses, and primidone (Mysoline),
50 to 250 mg a day, are usually effective in reducing the tremor. In persons
with hypokalemia, potassium supplementation may improve the tremor.
When a person taking lithium has a severe tremor, the possibility of lithium
toxicity should be suspected and evaluated.




<<<PAGE 2057>>>

COGNITIVE EFFECTS. Lithium use has been associated with dysphoria, lack of

spontaneity, slowed reaction times, and impaired memory. We should note
these symptoms carefully because they are a frequent cause of
noncompliance. The differential diagnosis for such symptoms should include
depressive disorders, hypothyroidism, hypercalcemia, other illnesses, and
other drugs. Some, but not all, persons have reported that fatigue and mild
cognitive impairment decrease with time.
OTHER NEUROLOGIC EFFECTS. Uncommon neurologic adverse effects include

symptoms of mild parkinsonism, ataxia, and dysarthria, although the last two
symptoms may also be attributable to lithium intoxication. Lithium is rarely
associated with the development of peripheral neuropathy, benign intracranial
hypertension (pseudotumor cerebri), findings resembling myasthenia gravis,
and increased risk of seizures.
Renal Effect. The most common adverse renal effect of lithium is polyuria
with secondary polydipsia. The symptom is particularly a problem in 25 to 35
percent of persons taking lithium who may have a urine output of more than
3 L a day (reference range: 1 to 2 L a day). The polyuria primarily results
from lithium antagonism to the effects of antidiuretic hormone, which thus
causes diuresis. When polyuria is a significant problem, the person’s renal
function should be evaluated and followed up with 24-hour urine collections
for creatinine clearance determinations. Treatment consists of fluid
replacement, the use of the lowest effective dosage of lithium, and single
daily dosing of lithium. Treatment can also involve the use of a thiazide or
potassium-sparing diuretic. For example, amiloride (Midamor),
spironolactone (Aldactone), triamterene (Dyrenium), or amiloride–
hydrochlorothiazide (Moduretic) may help. If treatment with a diuretic is
initiated, the lithium dosage should be halved, and the diuretic should not be
started for 5 days, because the diuretic is likely to increase lithium retention.
The most severe renal adverse effects, which are rare and associated with
continuous lithium administration for 10 years or more, involve the
appearance of nonspecific interstitial fibrosis, associated with gradual
decreases in glomerular filtration rate and increases in serum creatinine
concentrations, and rarely with renal failure. Lithium is occasionally




<<<PAGE 2058>>>

associated with nephrotic syndrome and features of distal renal tubular
acidosis. Another pathologic finding in patients with lithium nephropathy is
the presence of microcysts. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) can be used
to demonstrate renal microcysts secondary to chronic lithium nephropathy
and therefore avoid renal biopsy. It is prudent for persons taking lithium to
check their serum creatinine concentration, urine chemistries, and 24-hour
urine volume at 6-month intervals. If creatinine levels do rise, then more
frequent monitoring and MRI might be considered.
Thyroid Effects. Lithium causes a generally benign and often transient
diminution in the concentrations of circulating thyroid hormones. Reports
have attributed goiter (5 percent of persons), benign reversible exophthalmos,
hyperthyroidism, and hypothyroidism (7 to 10 percent of persons) to lithium
treatment. Lithium-induced hypothyroidism is more common in women (14
percent) than in men (4.5 percent). Women are at the highest risk during the
first 2 years of treatment. Persons taking lithium to treat bipolar disorder are
twice as likely to develop hypothyroidism if they develop rapid cycling.
About 50 percent of persons receiving long-term lithium treatment have
laboratory abnormalities, such as an abnormal TRH response, and about 30
percent have elevated concentrations of TSH. If symptoms of hypothyroidism
are present, replacement with levothyroxine (Synthroid) is indicated. Even in
the absence of hypothyroid symptoms, some clinicians treat persons with
significantly elevated TSH concentrations with levothyroxine. In lithiumtreated persons, TSH concentrations should be measured every 6 to 12
months. Lithium-induced hypothyroidism should be considered when
evaluating depressive episodes that emerge during lithium therapy.
Cardiac Effects. The cardiac effects of lithium resemble those of
hypokalemia on ECG. The displacement of intracellular potassium by the
lithium ion causes this. The most common changes on the ECG are T-wave
flattening or inversion. The changes are benign and disappear after lithium is
excreted from the body.
Lithium depresses the pacemaking activity of the sinus node, sometimes
resulting in sinus dysrhythmias, heart block, and episodes of syncope.
Lithium treatment, therefore, is contraindicated in persons with sick sinus
syndrome. In rare cases, ventricular arrhythmias and congestive heart failure




<<<PAGE 2059>>>

have been associated with lithium therapy. Lithium cardiotoxicity is prevalent
in persons on a low-salt diet, those taking certain diuretics or ACEIs, and
those with fluid–electrolyte imbalances or any renal insufficiency.
Dermatologic Effects. Dermatologic effects may be dose-dependent. They
include acneiform, follicular, and maculopapular eruptions; pretibial
ulcerations; and worsening of psoriasis. Occasionally, aggravated psoriasis or
acneiform eruptions may force the discontinuation of lithium treatment.
Alopecia has also been reported. Persons with many of those conditions
respond favorably to changing to another lithium preparation and the usual
dermatologic measures. Lithium concentrations should be monitored if
tetracycline is used for the treatment of acne because it can increase the
retention of lithium.
Lithium Toxicity and Overdoses. The early signs and symptoms of
lithium toxicity include neurologic symptoms, such as coarse tremor,
dysarthria, and ataxia; GI symptoms; cardiovascular changes; and renal
dysfunction. The later signs and symptoms include impaired consciousness,
muscular fasciculations, myoclonus, seizures, and coma. Signs and symptoms
of lithium toxicity are outlined in Table 21-28. Risk factors include
exceeding the recommended dosage, renal impairment, low-sodium diet, drug
interaction, and dehydration. Elderly persons are more vulnerable to the
effects of increased serum lithium concentrations. The greater the degree and
duration of elevated lithium concentrations, the worse are the symptoms of
lithium toxicity.
Table 21-28
Signs and Symptoms of Lithium Toxicity
1. Mild to moderate intoxication (lithium level, 1.5–2.0 mEq/L)
GI

Vomiting
Abdominal pain
Dryness of mouth

Neurologic Ataxia
Dizziness




<<<PAGE 2061>>>

value of forced diuresis is still debated. In severe cases, hemodialysis rapidly
removes excessive amounts of serum lithium. Postdialysis serum lithium
concentrations may increase as lithium is redistributed from tissues to the
blood, so repeat dialysis may be needed. Neurologic improvement may lag
behind the clearance of serum lithium by several days because lithium
crosses the blood–brain barrier slowly.
Table 21-29
Management of Lithium Toxicity
1. Contact personal physician or go to a hospital emergency
department
2. Lithium should be discontinued
3. Vital signs and a neurologic examination with complete formal
mental status examination
4. Lithium level, serum electrolytes, renal function tests, and ECG
5. Emesis, gastric lavage, and absorption with Kayexalate or
GoLYTELY
6. For any patient with a serum lithium level greater than 4.0 mEq/L,
hemodialysis
ECG, electrocardiography.

Adolescents. The serum lithium concentrations for adolescents are similar
to those for adults. Weight gain and acne associated with lithium use can be
particularly troublesome to adolescents.
Elderly Persons. Lithium is a safe and effective drug for elderly persons.
However, the treatment of elderly persons taking lithium may be complicated
by the presence of other medical illnesses, decreased renal function, special
diets that affect lithium clearance, and generally increased sensitivity to
lithium. Elderly persons should initially be given low dosages, their dosages
should be switched less frequently than those of younger persons, and a
longer time must be allowed for renal excretion to equilibrate with absorption
before lithium can be assumed to have reached its steady-state
concentrations.




<<<PAGE 2062>>>

Pregnant Women. Lithium should not be administered to pregnant women
in the first trimester because of the risk of congenital disabilities. The most
common malformations involve the cardiovascular system, most commonly
Ebstein anomaly of the tricuspid valves. The risk of Ebstein malformation in
lithium-exposed fetuses is 1 in 1,000, which is 20 times the risk in the general
population. The possibility of fetal cardiac anomalies can be evaluated with
fetal echocardiography. The teratogenic risk of lithium (4 to 12 percent) is
higher than that for the general population (2 to 3 percent) but appears to be
lower than that associated with the use of valproate or carbamazepine. A
woman who continues to take lithium during pregnancy should use the lowest
effective dosage. The maternal lithium concentration must be monitored
closely during pregnancy, and especially after pregnancy, because of the
significant decrease in renal lithium excretion as the renal function returns to
normal in the first few days after delivery. Adequate hydration can reduce the
risk of lithium toxicity during labor. Lithium prophylaxis is recommended for
all women with bipolar disorder as they enter the postpartum period. Lithium
is excreted into breast milk and should be taken by a nursing mother only
after careful evaluation of potential risks and benefits. Signs of lithium
toxicity in infants include lethargy, cyanosis, abnormal reflexes, and
sometimes hepatomegaly.
Miscellaneous Effects. Lithium should be used with caution in diabetic
persons, who should monitor their blood glucose concentrations carefully to
avoid diabetic ketoacidosis. Benign, reversible leukocytosis is commonly
associated with lithium treatment. Dehydrated, debilitated, and medically ill
persons are most susceptible to adverse effects and toxicity.
Drug Interactions
Lithium drug interactions are summarized in Table 21-30.
Lithium is commonly used in conjunction with DRAs. This combination is
typically sufficient and safe. However, coadministration of higher dosages of
a DRA and lithium may result in a synergistic increase in the symptoms of
lithium-induced neurologic side effects and neuroleptic extrapyramidal
symptoms. In rare instances, encephalopathy has been reported with this
combination.




<<<PAGE 2063>>>

The coadministration of lithium and carbamazepine, lamotrigine,
valproate, and clonazepam may increase lithium concentrations and
aggravate lithium-induced neurologic adverse effects. Treatment with the
combination should be initiated at slightly lower dosages than usual, and the
dosages should be increased gradually. Changes from one to another
treatment for mania should be made carefully, with as little temporal overlap
between the drugs as possible.
Most diuretics (e.g., thiazide and potassium-sparing) can increase lithium
concentrations; when treatment with such a diuretic is stopped, the clinician
may need to increase the person’s daily lithium dosage. Osmotic and loop
diuretics, carbonic anhydrase inhibitors, and xanthines (including caffeine)
may reduce lithium concentrations to below therapeutic concentrations.
Whereas ACEIs may cause an increase in lithium concentrations, the AT1
angiotensin II receptor inhibitors losartan (Cozaar) and irbesartan (Avapro)
do not alter lithium concentrations. A wide range of NSAIDs can decrease
lithium clearance, thereby increasing lithium concentrations. These drugs
include indomethacin (Indocin), phenylbutazone (Azolid), diclofenac
(Voltaren), ketoprofen (Orudis), oxyphenbutazone (Oxalid), ibuprofen
(Motrin, Advil), piroxicam (Feldene), and naproxen (Naprosyn). Aspirin and
sulindac (Clinoril) do not affect lithium concentrations.
The coadministration of lithium and quetiapine (Seroquel) may cause
somnolence but is otherwise well tolerated. The coadministration of lithium
and ziprasidone (Geodon) may modestly increase the incidence of tremors.
The coadministration of lithium and calcium channel inhibitors should be
avoided because of potentially fatal neurotoxicity.
A person taking lithium who is about to undergo ECT should discontinue
taking lithium 2 days before beginning ECT to reduce the risk of delirium.
Laboratory Interferences
Lithium does not interfere with any laboratory tests, but lithium-induced
alterations include an increased WBC count, decreased serum thyroxine, and
increased serum calcium. Blood collected in a lithium–heparin anticoagulant
tube will produce falsely elevated lithium concentrations.
Dosage and Clinical Guidelines




<<<PAGE 2064>>>

Initial Medical Workup. All patients should have a routine laboratory
workup and physical examination before being started on lithium. The
laboratory tests should include serum creatinine concentration (or a 24-hour
urine creatinine if the clinician has any reason to be concerned about renal
function), electrolytes, thyroid function (TSH, T3 [triiodothyronine], and T4
[thyroxine]), a CBC, ECG, and a pregnancy test in women of childbearing
age.
Dosage Recommendations. Lithium formulations include immediaterelease 150-, 300-, and 600-mg lithium carbonate capsules (Eskalith and
generic), 300 mg lithium carbonate tablets (Lithotabs), 450-mg controlledrelease lithium carbonate capsules (Eskalith CR and Lithonate), and 8 mEq/5
mL of lithium citrate syrup.
The starting dosage for most adults is 300 mg of the regular-release
formulation three times daily. The starting dosage for elderly persons or
persons with renal impairment should be 300 mg once or twice daily. After
stabilization, dosages between 900 and 1,200 mg a day usually produce a
therapeutic plasma concentration of 0.6 to 1 mEq/L, and a daily dose of 1,200
to 1,800 mg usually produces a therapeutic concentration of 0.8 to 1.2
mEq/L. Maintenance dosing can be given either in two or three divided doses
of the regular-release formulation or in a single dosage of the sustainedrelease formulation equivalent to the combined daily dosage of the regularrelease formulation. The use of divided doses reduces gastric upset and
avoids single high-peak lithium concentrations. Discontinuation of lithium
should be gradual to minimize the risk of early recurrence of mania and to
permit recognition of early signs of recurrence.
Table 21-30
Drug Interactions with Lithium
Drug Class

Reaction

Antipsychotics

Case reports of encephalopathy, worsening of
extrapyramidal adverse effects, and neuroleptic
malignant syndrome; inconsistent reports of
altered red blood cell and plasma




<<<PAGE 2065>>>

concentrations of lithium, antipsychotic drug, or
both
Antidepressants

Occasional reports of a serotonin-like syndrome
with potent serotonin reuptake inhibitors

Anticonvulsants

No significant pharmacokinetic interactions with
carbamazepine or valproate; reports of
neurotoxicity with carbamazepine;
combinations helpful for treatment resistance

NSAIDs

May reduce renal lithium clearance and increase
serum concentration; toxicity reported
(exception is aspirin)

Diuretics
Thiazides

Well-documented reduced renal lithium clearance
and increased serum concentration; toxicity
reported

Potassium
sparing

Limited data; may increase lithium concentration

Loop

Lithium clearance unchanged (some case reports
of increased lithium concentration)

Osmotic
Increase renal lithium clearance and decrease
(mannitol, urea)
lithium concentration
Xanthine
Increase renal lithium clearance and decrease
(aminophylline,
lithium concentration
caffeine,
theophylline)
Carbonic
Increase renal lithium clearance
anhydrase
inhibitors
(acetazolamide)
ACEIs

Reports of reduced lithium clearance, increased




<<<PAGE 2066>>>

concentrations, and toxicity
Calcium channel
inhibitors

Case reports of neurotoxicity; no consistent
pharmacokinetic interactions

Miscellaneous
Succinylcholine,
pancuronium

Reports of prolonged neuromuscular blockade

Metronidazole

Increased lithium concentration

Methyldopa

Few reports of neurotoxicity

Sodium
bicarbonate

Increased renal lithium clearance

Iodides

Additive antithyroid effects

Propranolol

Used for lithium tremor; possible slight increase
in lithium concentration

NSAID, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug; ACEI, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor.

Laboratory Monitoring. The periodic measurement of serum lithium
concentration is an essential aspect of patient care, but it should always be
combined with sound clinical judgment. A laboratory report listing the
therapeutic range as 0.5 to 1.2 mEq/L may lull a clinician into disregarding
early signs of lithium intoxication in patients whose levels are around 1.2
mEq/L. Clinical toxicity, especially in elderly persons, has been well
documented at or slightly above the upper limit of the therapeutic range.
Regular monitoring of serum lithium concentrations is essential. Lithium
levels should be obtained every 2 to 6 months except when there are signs of
toxicity, during dosage adjustments, and in persons suspected to be
noncompliant with the prescribed dosages. Under these circumstances, levels
may be done weekly. Baseline ECG studies are essential and should be
repeated annually.
When obtaining blood for lithium levels, patients should be at steady-state
lithium dosing (usually after 5 days of constant dosing), preferably using a
twice-daily or thrice-daily dosing regimen, and the blood sample must be
drawn 12 hours (±30 minutes) after a given dose. Lithium concentrations 12




<<<PAGE 2067>>>

hours postdose in persons treated with sustained-release preparations are
generally about 30 percent higher than the corresponding concentrations
obtained from those taking the regular-release preparations. Because
available data are based on a sample population following a multiple-dosage
regimen, regular-release formulations given at least twice daily should be
used for the initial determination of the appropriate dosages. Factors that may
cause fluctuations in lithium measurements include dietary sodium intake,
mood state, activity level, body position, and use of an improper blood
sample tube.
Laboratory values that do not seem to correspond to clinical status may
result from the collection of blood in a tube with a lithium–heparin
anticoagulant (which can give results falsely elevated by as much as 1
mEq/L) or aging of the lithium ion-selective electrode (which can cause
inaccuracies of up to 0.5 mEq/L). After the daily dose has been set, it is
reasonable to change to the sustained-release formulation given once daily.
Effective serum concentrations for mania are 1.0 to 1.2 mEq/L, a level
associated with 1,800 mg a day. The recommended range for maintenance
treatment is 0.4 to 0.8 mEq/L, which is usually achieved with a daily dose of
900 to 1,200 mg. A small number of persons will not achieve therapeutic
benefit with a lithium concentration of 1.2 mEq/L, yet will have no signs of
toxicity. For such persons, titration of the lithium dosage to achieve a
concentration above 1.2 mEq/L may be warranted. Some patients can be
maintained at concentrations below 0.4 mEq/L. There may be considerable
variation from patient to patient, so it is best to follow the maxim, “treat the
patient, not the laboratory results.” The only way to establish an optimal dose
for a patient may be through trial and error.
Package inserts (US) for lithium products list effective serum
concentrations for mania between 1.0 and 1.2 mEq/L (usually achieved with
1,800 mg of lithium carbonate daily) and for long-term maintenance between
0.6 and 1.2 mEq/L (usually achieved with 900 to 1,200 mg of lithium
carbonate daily). The dose–blood level relationship may vary considerably
from patient to patient. The likelihood of achieving a response at levels above
1.2 mEq/L is usually significantly outweighed by the increased risk of
toxicity, although rarely a patient may both require and tolerate a higher-thanusual blood concentration.
What constitutes the lower end of the therapeutic range remains a matter of




<<<PAGE 2068>>>

debate. A prospective 3-year study found patients who maintained a
concentration between 0.4 and 0.6 mEq/L (mean 0.54) were 2.6 times more
likely to relapse than those who maintained between 0.8 and 1.0 mEq/L
(mean 0.83). However, higher blood concentrations produced more adverse
effects and were less well tolerated.
If there is no response after 2 weeks at a concentration that is beginning to
cause adverse effects, then the person should taper off lithium over 1 to 2
weeks, and other mood-stabilizing drugs should be tried.
Patient Education. Lithium has a narrow therapeutic index, and many
factors can upset the balance between lithium concentrations that are well
tolerated and therapeutic, and those that produce side effects or toxicity. It is
thus imperative that persons taking lithium be educated about signs and
symptoms of toxicity, factors that affect lithium levels, how and when to
obtain laboratory testing, and the importance of regular communication with
the prescribing physician. Lithium concentrations can be disrupted by
common factors such as excessive sweating from ambient heat or exercise or
the use of widely prescribed agents such as ACEIs or NSAIDs. Patients may
stop taking their lithium because they are feeling well or because they are
experiencing side effects. They should be advised against discontinuing or
modifying their lithium regimen. Table 21-31 lists some essential instructions
for patients.

VALPROATE
Valproate (Depakene, Depakote), or valproic acid, is approved for the
treatment of manic episodes associated with bipolar I disorder and is one of
the most widely prescribed mood stabilizers in psychiatry. It has a rapid onset
of action and is well-tolerated, and numerous studies suggest that it reduces
the frequency and intensity of recurrent manic episodes over extended
periods.
Chemistry
Valproate is a simple-chain branch carboxylic acid. It is called valproic acid
because it is rapidly converted to the acid form in the stomach. Multiple
formulations of valproic acid are marketed. These include valproic acid




<<<PAGE 2069>>>

(Depakene), divalproex sodium (Depakote), an enteric-coated delayed-release
1:1 mixture of valproic acid and sodium valproate available in tablet and
sprinkle formulation (can be opened and spread on food); and sodium
valproate injection (Depacon). Extended-release preparation is also available.
Each of these is therapeutically equivalent because, at physiologic pH,
valproic acid dissociates into valproate ion.
Table 21-31
Instructions to Patients Taking Lithium
Lithium can be remarkably effective in treating your disorder. If not
used appropriately and not monitored closely, it can be ineffective
and potentially harmful. It is important to keep the following
instructions in mind.
Dosing
Take lithium exactly as directed by your doctor—never take more or
less than the prescribed dose.
Do not stop taking without speaking to your doctor.
If you miss a dose, take it as soon as possible. If it is within 4 hr of
the next dose, skip the missed dose (about 6 hr in the case of
extended-release or slow-release preparations). Never double up
doses.
Blood Tests
Comply with the schedule of recommended regular blood tests.
Despite their inconvenience and discomfort, your lithium blood levels,
thyroid function, and kidney status need to be monitored as long as
you take lithium.
When going to have lithium levels checked, you should have taken
your last lithium dose 12 hr earlier.
Use of Other Medications
Do not start any prescription or over-the-counter medications without
telling your doctor.
Even drugs such as ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin) and naproxen (Aleve)
can significantly increase lithium levels.


