<<<PAGE 415>>>

during clozapine use. Its use is generally limited to treatment-resistant
psychotic patients.
Ziprasidone has receptor-blocking properties at the 5-HT2A and D2
receptor sites and carries little risk of extrapyramidal and antihistaminic
effects. No guidelines exist for its use in autistic children with aggressive and
self-injurious behaviors; clinicians sometimes use it to treat these behaviors
in treatment-resistant children. In studies of its use in adults with
schizophrenia, dose ranges of 40 to 160 mg were effective. Adverse effects
include sedation, dizziness, and lightheadedness. Before using this
medication, the clinician should check an electrocardiogram.
Lithium is efficacious in children with aggression without autism spectrum
disorder, and it is used clinically in the treatment of aggressive or selfinjurious behaviors when antipsychotic medications are not helpful.
Agents Used for Behavioral Impairment in Autism Spectrum
Disorder without Evidence of Efficacy. A double-blind study
investigated the efficacy of amantadine, which blocks N-methyl-D-aspartate
(NMDA) receptors, in the treatment of behavioral disturbance, such as
irritability, aggression, and hyperactivity, in children with autism. Some
researchers have suggested that abnormalities of the glutamatergic system
may contribute to the emergence of autism spectrum disorders. High
glutamate levels occur in children with the formerly labeled Rett syndrome.
In the amantadine study, 47 percent of children on amantadine were
“improved” per their parents, and 37 percent of children on placebo were
rated “improved” by parents in irritability and hyperactivity, although this
difference was not statistically significant. Investigators rated the children on
amantadine “significantly improved” for hyperactivity. A double-blind,
placebo-controlled study of the efficacy of the anticonvulsant lamotrigine on
hyperactivity in children with autism showed high rates of placebo
improvement in ratings of hyperactivity, which were similar to response on
the medication.
Clomipramine is sometimes used but lacks RCTs to provide evidence of
positive results. Fenfluramine, which reduces blood serotonin levels, has also
been used but appears to be ineffective. Improvement does not seem to be
associated with a reduction in blood serotonin levels. Naltrexone, an opioid




<<<PAGE 819>>>

abnormalities in memory and speech, we should suspect a temporal lobe
tumor.
COGNITION. Impaired intellectual functioning often accompanies the presence

of a brain tumor, regardless of its type or location.
LANGUAGE SKILLS. Disorders of language function may be severe, mainly if

tumor growth is rapid. Defects of language function often obscure all other
mental symptoms.
Table 3-34
Commonly Used Anticonvulsant Drugs
Drug

Use

Carbamazepine Generalized tonic–clonic, partial

Maintenance
Dosage
(mg/day)
600–1,200

Clonazepam

Absence, atypical myoclonic

2–12

Ethosuximide

Absence

1,000–2,000

Gabapentin

Complex partial seizures
(augmentation)

900–3,600

Lamotrigine

Complex partial seizures,
generalized (augmentation)

300–500

Oxcarbazepine Partial

600–2,400

Phenobarbital

Generalized tonic–clonic

100–200

Phenytoin

Generalized tonic–clonic, partial,
status epilepticus

300–500

Primidone

Partial

750–1,000

Tiagabine

Generalized

32–56

Topiramate

Complex partial seizures
(augmentation)

200–400




<<<PAGE 1200>>>

Anticonvulsants. Valproate (valproic acid or divalproex sodium) has
surpassed lithium in use for acute mania. Unlike lithium, valproate is only
indicated for acute mania, although most experts agree it also has
prophylactic effects. Normal dose levels of valproic acid are 750 to 2,500
mg/day, achieving blood levels between 50 and 120 µg/mL. Rapid oral
loading with 15 to 20 mg/kg of divalproex sodium from day 1 of treatment
has been well tolerated and associated with a rapid onset of response. Some
laboratory testing is required during valproate treatment.
Carbamazepine has been used worldwide for decades as a first-line
treatment for acute mania. The FDA approved it for acute mania in the
United States in 2004. Typical doses of carbamazepine to treat acute mania
range between 600 and 1,800 mg/day associated with blood levels of between
4 and 12 µg/mL. The keto congener of carbamazepine, oxcarbazepine, is
better tolerated than carbamazepine, but the data for its efficacy are
conflicting. A Cochrane review concluded there is insufficient evidence for
this medication in acute mania.
Antipsychotics. The FDA approved many of the atypical antipsychotics for
use in bipolar disorder. We list them in Table 6-7. Compared with older
agents, such as haloperidol and chlorpromazine, atypical antipsychotics have
a lesser liability for excitatory postsynaptic potential and tardive dyskinesia;
many do not increase prolactin. However, many of them have the risk of
weight gain with its associated medical problems. Some patients, however,
require maintenance treatment with antipsychotic medication.
Acute Bipolar Depression
Lithium. There is limited evidence for lithium in bipolar depression. Early
studies were promising, but later placebo-controlled studies did not confirm
lithium’s efficacy. More extensive studies that included lithium did suggest
that lithium was at least as useful as other mood stabilizers for bipolar
depression.
Anticonvulsants. The most promising anticonvulsant has been lamotrigine,
which has several reasonable studies showing efficacy for bipolar depression.
Its major limitation is that it must be titrated gradually to prevent a severe




<<<PAGE 1356>>>

TREATMENT
Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder
Pharmacotherapy. Effective medications include clomipramine and
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs, which, along with
clomipramine and other serotonergic medications, are sometimes called
serotonin reuptake inhibitor [SRIs]). Head-to-head comparisons of
clomipramine and SSRIs show equal efficacy but better tolerability of the
SSRIs. In general, clinicians must use higher doses to achieve an optimal
effect. Examples are doses of 80 mg of fluoxetine or 200 mg of sertraline.
Some patients respond to even higher doses. Exceeding the recommended
doses is not, however, advisable for clomipramine or citalopram, due to
safety concerns. There is also some evidence that response to SRIs is slower
in OCD than in depression; clinicians are therefore encouraged to prescribe
an SRI for at least 12 weeks before deciding to switch agents or augment
with another psychotropic. A general rule of thumb is that we should
continue to use the dose that was required to obtain a response for at least 1
to 2 years. When discontinuing medication, there is a real risk of relapse, so
this should be done very gradually, with small adjustments made every few
months.
Patients who fail to respond to one SRI may respond to another.
The most extensive evidence base is for antipsychotics in adult OCD.
Among those, risperidone and aripiprazole are best supported as adjuncts.
Some studies have indicated that these are particularly useful in patients with
tics, but not all data are consistent. When a response to these agents occurs, it
typically happens relatively quickly (e.g., 4 weeks). When using dopamine
receptor blockers, it is crucial to monitor adverse events.
Memantine, riluzole, ketamine, lamotrigine, and N-acetylcysteine (NAC)
are other promising augmentation agents.
Psychotherapy. There is a long history of understanding OCD symptoms
from a psychodynamic perspective, but there is no rigorous evidence that a
psychodynamic approach is useful in the treatment of OCD. Instead,
empirical research on the psychotherapy of OCD has emerged from
behavioral and cognitive perspectives. Exposure and response prevention




<<<PAGE 1436>>>

Electroconvulsive therapy (for refractory depression with persistent
melancholic features across all dissociative identity disorder
alters)
Mood stabilizers (more useful for PTSD and anxiety than mood
swings)
Divalproex
Lamotrigine
Oral or intramuscular benzodiazepines
Medications for sleep problems
Low-dose trazodone
Low-dose mirtazapine
Low-dose tricyclic antidepressants
Low-dose neuroleptics
Benzodiazepines (often less helpful for sleep problems in this
population)
Zolpidem
Anticholinergic agents (diphenhydramine, hydroxyzine)
Medications for self-injury, addictions
Naltrexone
Brainwashing
There are no empirical treatment studies of individuals subjected to extreme
coercion applied in the service of indoctrination into a belief system or an
attempt at identity alteration. The basic principles of phased trauma treatment
would seem to provide an organizing framework for their care, as for victims
of other forms of torture. Family and social interventions may be necessary
because of the duress and disruption accompanying the precipitating events
and the social effects of the profound changes in the patient’s attitudes,
behaviors, and beliefs, as well as sequestration from everyday events during
the period of captivity.
Ganser Syndrome
No systematic treatment studies have been conducted, given the rarity of this
condition. In most case reports, the patient has been hospitalized and
provided with a protective and supportive environment. In some instances,




<<<PAGE 1880>>>

Thus, blockade of serotonin reuptake by SSRIs can cause nausea and sexual
dysfunction. The D2 blockade of drugs used to treat psychosis can cause
extrapyramidal side effects. Agonist action of benzodiazepine receptors can
cause ataxia and daytime sleepiness. In these cases, additional medications
are frequently used to make the primary agent better tolerated.
Time Course
Adverse effects differ in terms of their onset and duration. Some side effects
appear at the outset of treatment and then rapidly diminish. Nausea occurring
with SSRIs or venlafaxine (Effexor) and sedation occurring with mirtazapine
(Remeron) are good examples of early, time-limited side effects. Early-onset,
but persistent, side effects include a dry mouth that is associated with
noradrenergic reuptake inhibition or antimuscarinic activity. Some side
effects appear later in treatment (late-appearing side effects) and, sometimes
may be just the opposite of adverse events early in treatment. For example,
patients may typically lose weight during early treatment with SSRIs, only to
find, over time, a reversal occurs, so that they gain weight.
Similarly, early activation or agitation may be followed by constant fatigue
or apathy. Because most data about new drugs come from short-term studies,
generally 8 weeks in duration, early-onset side effects are overrepresented in
product information and descriptions of newly marketed information.
Clinicians must follow the letters to the editor sections of journals and other
sources of information to update their understanding of the real side effect
profile of a drug.
Adverse effects differ in their impact on compliance and the potential to
cause harm. Depending on a patient’s threshold of tolerance for a side effect
and the impact on the quality of life, side effects can lead to drug
discontinuation. Examples of serious side effects include agranulocytosis
(clozapine), Stevens–Johnson syndrome (lamotrigine [Lamictal]), hepatic
failure (nefazodone [Serzone]), stroke (phenelzine [Nardil]), and heart block
(thioridazine [Mellaril]). Overall, the risk of life-threatening side effects with
psychotropics is low. Drugs that carry such a risk should be monitored more
closely, and the prescribing physician should take into account whether the
potential clinical benefits justify the additional risk. Any drug with a serious
risk, as reflected in a black box warning, is generally used less extensively




<<<PAGE 1902>>>

Cognitive Impairment. Cognitive impairment means a disturbance in the
capacity to think. Some agents, such as the benzodiazepine agonists, are
recognized as causes of cognitive impairment. Other widely used
psychotropics, such as the SSRIs, lamotrigine (Lamictal), topiramate
(Topamax), gabapentin (Neurontin), lithium, TCAs, and bupropion, however,
are also associated with varying degrees of memory impairment and wordfinding difficulties. In contrast to the benzodiazepine-induced anterograde
amnesia, these agents cause a more subtle type of absent-mindedness. Drugs
with anticholinergic properties are likely to worsen memory performance.
Sweating. Severe perspiration unrelated to ambient temperature is
associated with TCAs, SSRIs, and venlafaxine. This side effect is often
socially disabling. Attempts can be made to treat this side effect with alpha
agents, such as terazosin (Hytrin) and oxybutynin (Ditropan).
Cardiovascular Disturbances. Newer agents are less likely to have
direct cardiac effects. Many older agents, such as TCAs and phenothiazines,
affected BP and cardiac conduction. Thioridazine (Mellaril), which has been
in use for decades, has been shown to prolong the QTc interval in a doserelated manner and may increase the risk of sudden death by delaying
ventricular repolarization and causing torsades de pointes. Newer drugs are
now routinely scrutinized for evidence of cardiac effects. A promising
treatment for psychosis, sertindole (Serlect), was not marketed because the
FDA would have required a black box warning. Slight QTc effects noted with
ziprasidone (Geodon) delayed the marketing of that drug. Clozapine can
cause myocarditis in rare cases.
Rash. Any medication is a potential source of a drug rash. Some
psychotropics, such as carbamazepine (Equetro, Tegretol) and lamotrigine,
have been linked to an increased risk of severe exfoliative dermatitis.
Commonly referred to as Stevens–Johnson syndrome, this condition is a
systemic, immune-mediated reaction that can prove fatal or result in
permanent scarring or blindness. All patients should be informed about the
potential seriousness of widespread lesions that occur above the neck, that
involve the mucous membranes, and that may be associated with fever and




<<<PAGE 2077>>>

depressant (e.g., alcohol), and increased severity of extrapyramidal
symptoms, which usually responds to treatment with antiparkinsonian drugs.
Valproate can usually be safely combined with carbamazepine or SDAs.
Perhaps the most worrisome interaction of valproate and a psychotropic drug
involves lamotrigine. Since the approval of lamotrigine for the treatment of
bipolar disorder, it is more likely that patients will be treated with both
agents. Valproate more than doubles lamotrigine concentrations, increasing
the risk of a severe rash (Stevens–Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal
necrolysis).
The plasma concentrations of carbamazepine, diazepam (Valium),
amitriptyline (Elavil), nortriptyline (Pamelor), and phenobarbital (Luminal)
may also be increased when these drugs are coadministered with valproate.
Also, the plasma concentrations of phenytoin (Dilantin) and desipramine
(Norpramin) may be decreased when they are combined with valproate. The
plasma concentrations of valproate may be decreased when the drug is
coadministered with carbamazepine and may be increased when
coadministered with guanfacine (Tenex), amitriptyline, or fluoxetine
(Prozac). Valproate can be displaced from plasma proteins by carbamazepine,
diazepam, and aspirin. Persons who are treated with anticoagulants (e.g.,
aspirin and warfarin [Coumadin]) should also be monitored when valproate
use is initiated to assess the development of any undesired augmentation of
the anticoagulation effects. Interactions of valproate with other drugs are
listed in Table 21-34.
Table 21-34
Interactions of Valproate with Other Drugs
Drug

Interactions Reported with Valproate

Lithium

Increased tremor

Antipsychotics

Increased sedation; increased extrapyramidal
effects; delirium and stupor (single report)

Clozapine

Increased sedation; confusional syndrome (single
report)

Carbamazepine Acute psychosis (single report); ataxia, nausea,




<<<PAGE 2081>>>

capsules
Divalproex
Depakote ER
sodium
(250, 500
extendedmg)
release

4–17 hr

LAMOTRIGINE
Lamotrigine (Lamictal) was developed as a result of screening folate
antagonists as anticonvulsants. Lamotrigine proved effective in several
animal models of epilepsy, was developed as an antiepileptic drug, and was
marketed for the adjunctive treatment of partial seizures in the United States
in 1995. Initial, postmarketing, open, clinical experience suggested efficacy
in a variety of neurologic and psychiatric conditions, coupled with good
tolerability (aside from the risk of rash). Later, double-blind, placebocontrolled studies revealed that lamotrigine was useful for some, but not all,
of the neurologic and psychiatric conditions reported in open studies.
Therefore, lamotrigine appeared effective as a maintenance treatment for
bipolar disorder and was approved for the maintenance treatment of bipolar I
disorder in 2003. Lamotrigine also appeared to have potential utility in acute
bipolar depression. However, the magnitude of the effect was too modest to
yield consistently superior performance compared with placebo, and hence
lamotrigine did not receive approval for the treatment of acute bipolar
depression.
Similarly, limited data suggested that lamotrigine had potential utility in
rapid-cycling bipolar disorder. Lamotrigine did not appear to be as effective
as the primary intervention in acute mania. Thus, lamotrigine has emerged as
an agent that appears to “stabilize mood from below” in the sense that it may
maximally impact the depressive component of bipolar disorders.
Pharmacologic Actions
Lamotrigine is wholly absorbed, has a bioavailability of 98 percent, and has a
steady-state plasma half-life of 25 hours. However, the rate of metabolism of
lamotrigine varies over a sixfold range, depending on which other drugs are
administered concomitantly. Dosing is escalated slowly to twice-a-day




<<<PAGE 2082>>>

maintenance dosing. Food does not affect its absorption, and it is 55 percent
protein-bound in the plasma; 94 percent of lamotrigine and its inactive
metabolites are excreted in the urine. Among the better-delineated
biochemical actions of lamotrigine is the blockade of voltage-sensitive
sodium channels, which in turn modulates the release of glutamate and
aspartate and has a slight effect on calcium channels. Lamotrigine modestly
increases plasma serotonin concentrations, possibly through inhibition of
serotonin reuptake, and is a weak inhibitor of serotonin 5-HT3 receptors.
Therapeutic Indications
Bipolar Disorder. Lamotrigine is indicated in the treatment of bipolar
disorder and may prolong the time between episodes of depression and
mania. It is more effective in lengthening the intervals between depressive
episodes than manic episodes. It is also useful as a treatment for rapid-cycling
bipolar disorder.
Other Indications. There have been reports of therapeutic benefit in the
treatment of borderline personality disorder and the treatment for various pain
syndromes.
Precautions and Adverse Reactions
Lamotrigine is remarkably well tolerated. The absence of sedation, weight
gain, and other metabolic effects are noteworthy. The most common adverse
effects—dizziness, ataxia, somnolence, headache, diplopia, blurred vision,
and nausea—are typically mild. Anecdotal reports of cognitive impairment
and joint or back pain are standard.
The appearance of a rash, which is common and occasionally very severe,
is a source of concern. About 8 percent of patients started on lamotrigine
develop a benign maculopapular rash during the first 4 months of treatment,
and the drug should be discontinued if a rash develops. Even though these
rashes are benign, there is concern that, in some cases, they may represent
early manifestations of Stevens–Johnson syndrome or toxic epidermal
necrolysis. Nevertheless, even if lamotrigine is discontinued immediately
upon the development of a rash or other signs of hypersensitivity reaction,
such as fever and lymphadenopathy, this may not prevent subsequent




<<<PAGE 2083>>>

development of a life-threatening rash or permanent disfiguration.
Estimates of the rate of severe rash vary, depending on the source of the
data. In some studies, the incidence of severe rashes was 0.08 percent in adult
patients receiving lamotrigine as initial monotherapy and 0.13 percent in
adult patients receiving lamotrigine as adjunctive therapy. German registry
data, based on clinical practice, suggest that the risk of rash may be as low as
1 in 5,000 patients. The appearance of any rash necessitates immediate
discontinuation of drug administration.
It is known that the likelihood of a rash increases if the recommended
starting dose and speed of dose increase exceed what is recommended.
Concomitant administration of valproic acid also increases risk and should be
avoided if possible. If valproate is used, a more conservative dosing regimen
is followed. Children and adolescents younger than age 16 years appear to be
more susceptible to rash with lamotrigine. If patients miss more than 4
consecutive days of lamotrigine treatment, they need to restart therapy at the
initial starting dose and titrate upward as if they had not already been on the
medication.
Laboratory Testing
There is no proven correlation between lamotrigine blood concentrations and
either antiseizure effects or efficacy in bipolar disorders. Laboratory tests are
not useful in predicting the occurrence of adverse events.
Drug Interactions
Lamotrigine has significant, well-characterized drug interactions involving
other anticonvulsants. The most potentially serious lamotrigine drug
interaction involves concurrent use of valproic acid, which doubles serum
lamotrigine concentrations. Lamotrigine decreases the plasma concentration
of valproic acid by 25 percent. Sertraline (Zoloft) also increases plasma
lamotrigine concentrations, but to a lesser extent than does valproic acid.
Lamotrigine concentrations are decreased by 40 to 50 percent with
concomitant administration of carbamazepine, phenytoin, or phenobarbital.
Combinations of lamotrigine and other anticonvulsants have complex effects
on the time of peak plasma concentration and the plasma half-life of
lamotrigine.




<<<PAGE 2084>>>

Laboratory Interferences
Lamotrigine does not interfere with any laboratory tests.
Dosage and Administration
In the clinical trials leading to the approval of lamotrigine as a treatment for
bipolar disorder, no consistent increase in efficacy was associated with doses
above 200 mg/day. Most patients should take between 100 and 200 mg a day.
In epilepsy, the drug is administered twice daily, but in bipolar disorder, the
total dose can be taken once a day, either in the morning or night, depending
on whether the patient finds the drug activating or sedating.
Lamotrigine is available as unscored 25-, 100-, 150-, and 200-mg tablets.
The primary determinant of lamotrigine dosing is the minimization of the risk
of rash. Lamotrigine should not be taken by anyone younger than 16 years of
age. Because valproic acid markedly slows the elimination of lamotrigine,
concomitant administration of these two drugs necessitates a much slower
titration (Table 21-37). People with renal insufficiency should aim for a lower
maintenance dosage. The appearance of any rash necessitates immediate
discontinuation of lamotrigine administration. Lamotrigine should usually be
discontinued gradually over 2 weeks unless a rash emerges, in which case it
should be discontinued over 1 to 2 days.
Lamotrigine orally disintegrating tablets (Lamictal ODT) are available for
patients who have difficulty swallowing. It is the only antiepileptic treatment
that is available in an orally disintegrating formulation. It is available in 25,
50, 100, and 200 mg strengths and matches the dose of lamotrigine tablets.
Chewable dispersible tablets of 2, 5, and 25 mg are also available.

CARBAMAZEPINE AND OXCARBAZEPINE
Carbamazepine (Tegretol) possesses some structural similarity to the TCA
imipramine (Tofranil). It was approved for use in the United States for the
treatment of trigeminal neuralgia in 1968 and temporal lobe epilepsy
(complex partial seizures) in 1974. Interestingly, carbamazepine was first
synthesized as a potential antidepressant, but because of its atypical profile in
several animal models, it was initially developed for use in pain and seizure
disorders. It is now recognized in most guidelines as a second-line mood




<<<PAGE 2085>>>

stabilizer useful in the treatment and prevention of both phases of bipolar
affective disorder. A long-acting sustained release formulation (Equetro) was
approved by the U.S. FDA for the treatment of acute mania in 2002.
Table 21-37
Lamotrigine Dosing (mg/day)
Treatment

Weeks 1–2

Weeks
3–4

Weeks 4–5

Lamotrigine
monotherapy

25

50

100–200 (200
maximum)

Lamotrigine +
carbamazepine

50

100

200–400 (400
maximum)

Lamotrigine +
valproate

25 every other 25
day

50–100 (100
maximum)

An analog of carbamazepine, oxcarbazepine (Trileptal), was marketed as
an antiseizure medication in the United States in 2000. Previously it was used
as a treatment for pediatric epilepsy in Europe since 1990. Because of its
similarity to carbamazepine, many clinicians began to use it as a treatment for
patients with bipolar disorder. Despite some reports that oxcarbazepine has
mood-stabilizing properties, this has not been confirmed in large, placebocontrolled trials.
Carbamazepine
Pharmacologic Actions. The absorption of carbamazepine is slow and
unpredictable. Food enhances absorption. Peak plasma concentrations are
reached 2 to 8 hours after a single dose, and steady-state levels are reached
after 2 to 4 days on a steady dosage. It is 70 to 80 percent protein-bound. The
half-life of carbamazepine ranges from 18 to 54 hours, with an average of 26
hours. However, with chronic administration, the half-life of carbamazepine
decreases to an average of 12 hours. This results from the induction of
hepatic CYP450 enzymes by carbamazepine, specifically the autoinduction
of carbamazepine metabolism. The induction of hepatic enzymes reaches its




<<<PAGE 2091>>>

Cyclosporine
Desipramine
Dicumarol
Doxepin
Doxycycline
Ethosuximide
Felbamate
Fentanyl
Fluphenazine
Haloperidol
Hormonal contraceptives
Imipramine
Lamotrigine
Methadone
Methsuximide
Methylprednisolone
Nimodipine
Pancuronium
Phensuximide
Phenytoin
Primidone
Theophylline
Valproate
Warfarin
Carbamazepine may increase drug
plasma concentrations of
Clomipramine
Phenytoin
Primidone

Fluoxetine
Fluvoxamine
Gemfibrozil
Itraconazole
Ketoconazole
Isoniazida
Itraconazole
Lamotrigine
Loratadine
Macrolides
Nefazodone
Nicotinamide
Propoxyphene
Terfenadine
Troleandomycin
Valproatea
Verapamil
Viloxazine
Drugs that may decrease
carbamazepine plasma
concentrations
Carbamazepine
(autoinduction)
Cisplatin
Doxorubicin HCl
Felbamate
Phenobarbital
Phenytoin
Primidone
Rifampinb
Theophylline
Valproate

aIncreased concentrations of the active 10,11-epoxide.
bDecreased concentrations of carbamazepine and increased concentrations of the 10,11-

epoxide.
Table by Carlos A. Zarate, Jr., M.D. and Mauricio Tohen, M.D.




<<<PAGE 2117>>>

of panic disorder, benzodiazepines have the advantage of working quickly
and not causing significant sexual dysfunction and weight gain. However, the
SSRIs are still often preferred because they target common comorbid
conditions, such as depression or OCD. Benzodiazepines and SSRIs can be
initiated together to treat acute panic symptoms; use of the benzodiazepine
can be tapered after 3 to 4 weeks once the therapeutic benefits of the SSRI
have emerged.
SOCIAL ANXIETY DISORDER. Clonazepam is an effective treatment for social

anxiety disorder. Also, several other benzodiazepines (e.g., diazepam) have
been used as adjunctive medications for the treatment of social anxiety
disorder.
Benzodiazepines are used adjunctively for
treatment of adjustment disorder with anxiety, pathologic anxiety associated
with life events (e.g., after an accident), OCD, and PTSD.
OTHER ANXIETY DISORDERS.

ANXIETY ASSOCIATED WITH DEPRESSION. Depressed patients often experience

significant anxiety, and antidepressant drugs may cause initial exacerbation
of these symptoms. Accordingly, benzodiazepines are indicated for the
treatment of anxiety associated with depression.
Bipolar I and II Disorders
Clonazepam, lorazepam, and alprazolam are useful in the management of
acute manic episodes and as an adjuvant to maintenance therapy instead of
antipsychotics. As an adjuvant to lithium (Eskalith) or lamotrigine
(Lamictal), clonazepam may result in an increased time between cycles and
fewer depressive episodes. Benzodiazepines may help patients with bipolar
disorder sleep better.
Catatonia. Lorazepam, sometimes in low doses (less than 5 mg/day) and
sometimes in very high doses (12 mg/day or more), is regularly used to treat
acute catatonia, which is more frequently associated with bipolar disorder
than with schizophrenia. Other benzodiazepines have also been said to be
helpful. However, there are no valid controlled trials of benzodiazepines in
catatonia. Chronic catatonia does not respond as well to benzodiazepines.




<<<PAGE 2268>>>

Neurophysiol. 2013;124(1):
148–153.
Du J, Suzuki K, Wei Y, Wang Y, Blumenthal R. The anticonvulsants
lamotrigine, riluzole, and valproate differentially regulate AMPA receptor
membrane localization: Relationship to clinical effects in mood disorders.
Neuropsychopharmacology. 2007;32:793–802.
Dubovsky SL. Calcium channel inhibitors. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz
P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed.
Vol. 2. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:3065.
Dubovsky SL, Buzan RD, Thomas M, Kassner C, Cullum CM. Nicardipine
improves the antidepressant action of ECT but does not improve cognition.
J ECT. 2001;17:
3–10.
Einat H, Manji HK. Cellular plasticity cascades: genes-to-behavior pathways
in animal models of bipolar disorder. Biol Psychiatry. 2006;59:1160–1171.
Findling RL, Frazier TW, Youngstrom EA, McNamara NK, Stansbrey RJ.
Doubleblind, placebo-controlled trial of divalproex monotherapy in the treatment
of symptomatic youth at high risk for developing bipolar disorder. J Clin
Psychiatry. 2007;68:781–788.
Freeman R, Durso-Decruz E, Emir B. Efficacy, safety, and tolerability of
pregabalin treatment for painful diabetic peripheral neuropathy: findings
from seven randomized, controlled trials across a range of doses. Diabetes
Care. 2008;31:1448–1454.
Frye MA, Ketter TA, Kimbrell TA, Dunn RT, Speer AM. A placebocontrolled study of lamotrigine and gabapentin monotherapy in refractory
mood disorders. J Clin Psychopharmacol. 2000;20(6):607–614.
Gadde KM, Franciscy DM, Wagner HR 2nd, Krishnan KR. Zonisamide for
weight loss in obese adults: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA.
2003;289(14):1820–1825.
Geddes JR, Burgess S, Hawton K, Jamison K, Goodwin GM. Long-term
lithium therapy for bipolar disorder: systematic review and meta-analysis
of randomized controlled trials. Am J Psychiatry. 2004;161:217–222.
Geddes JR, Calabrese JR, Goodwin GM. Lamotrigine for treatment of bipolar
depression: Independent meta-analysis and meta-regression of individual
patient data from five randomised trials. Br J Psychiatry. 2009;194:4.




<<<PAGE 2269>>>

Ghaemi NS, Ko JY, Katzow JJ. Oxcarbazepine treatment of refractory
bipolar disorder: a retrospective chart review. Bipolar Disord.
2002;4(1):70–74.
Goldberg JF, Bowden CL, Calabrese JR. Six-month prospective life charting
of mood symptoms with lamotrigine monotherapy versus placebo in rapid
cycling bipolar disorder. Biol Psychiatry. 2008;63:125.
Goodwin FK, Jamison KR. Manic-Depressive Illness. 2nd ed. New York:
Oxford University Press; 2007.
Goodwin GM, Bowden CL, Calabrese JR, Grunze H, Kasper S. A pooled
analysis of 2 placebo-controlled 18-month trials of lamotrigine and lithium
maintenance in bipolar I disorder. J Clin Psychiatry. 2004;65:432–441.
Grunze H, Erfurth A, Marcuse A, Amann B, Normann C. Tiagabine appears
not to be efficacious in the treatment of acute mania. J Clin Psychiatry.
1999;60(11):
759–762.
Hartong EG, Moleman P, Hoogduin CA, Broekman TG, Nolen WA.
Prophylactic efficacy of lithium versus carbamazepine in treatment-naive
bipolar patients. J Clin Psychiatry. 2003;64:144–151.
Harwood AJ. Lithium and bipolar mood disorder: the inositol-depletion
hypothesis revisited. Mol Psychiatry. 2005;10:117.
Hasan M, Pulman J, Marson AG. Calcium antagonists as an add-on therapy
for drug-resistant epilepsy. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
2013;3:CD002750.
Hoopes SP, Reimherr FW, Hedges DW, Rosenthal NR, Kamin M. Treatment
of bulimia nervosa with topiramate in a randomized, double-blind,
placebo-controlled trial, part 1: improvement in binge and purge measures.
J Clin Psychiatry. 2003;64(11):
1335–1341.
Ikeda A, Kato T. Biological predictors of lithium response in bipolar
disorder. Psychiatry Clin Neurosci. 2003;57:243–250.
Ishioka M, Yasui-Furukori N, Hashimoto K, Sugawara N. Neuroleptic
malignant syndrome induced by lamotrigine. Clin Neuropharmacol.
2013;36(4):131–132.
Isojarvi JI, Huuskonen UE, Pakarinen AJ, Vuolteenaho O, Myllyla VV. The
regulation of serum sodium after replacing carbamazepine with
oxcarbazepine. Epilepsia. 2001;42(6):741–745.




<<<PAGE 2270>>>

Jefferson JW, Greist JH. Lithium. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds.
Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Vol. 2.
Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:3132
Johnson BA, Rosenthal N, Capece JA. Improvement of physical health and
quality of life of alcohol-dependent individuals with topiramate treatment:
US multisite randomized controlled trial. Arch Intern Med.
2008;168:1188–1199.
Johnson BA, Rosenthal N, Capece JA, Wiegand F, Mao L. Topiramate for
treating alcohol dependence: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA.
2007;298(14):1641.
Kamalinia G, Brand S, Ghaeli P, Abedi N, Bajoghli H, Sharifi V, Zahiroddin
A, Amini M, Rouini MR, Holsboer-Trachsler E, Mohammadpoor AH.
Serum levels of sodium valproate in patients suffering from bipolar
disorders: comparing acute and maintenance phases of mania.
Pharmacopsychiatry. 2013;46(3):83–87.
Kato T, Ishiwata M, Mori K, Washizuka S, Tajima O. Mechanisms of altered
Ca2+ signaling in transformed lymphoblastoid cells from patients with
bipolar disorder. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol. 2003;6:379–389.
Ketter TA, Brooks JO, Hoblyn JC. Effectiveness of lamotrigine in bipolar
disorder in a clinical setting. J Psychiatr Res. 2008;43:13–23.
Ketter TA, Greist JH, Graham JA, Roberts JN, Thompson TR. The effect of
dermatologic precautions on the incidence of rash with addition of
lamotrigine in the treatment of bipolar I disorder: a randomized trial. J Clin
Psychiatry. 2006;67(3):400–406.
Ketter TA, Wang PW. Anticonvulsants: Gabapentin, levetiracetam,
pregabalin, tiagabine, topiramate, zonisamide. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA,
Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry.
9th ed. Vol. 2. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins;
2009:3021.
Ketter TA, Wang PW. Lamotrigine. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds.
Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Vol. 2.
Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:3127.
Ketter TA, Wang PW, Becker OV, Nowakowska C, Yang YS. The diverse
roles of anticonvulsants in bipolar disorders. Ann Clin Psychiatry.
2003;15:95–108.
Klitgaard H. Epilepsy therapy: anticonvulsants, lessons learned and unmet




<<<PAGE 2271>>>

medical needs. Expert Rev Neurother. 2013;13(1):13–14.
Kozaric-Kovacic D, Eterovic M. Lamotrigine abolished aggression in a
patient with treatment-resistant posttraumatic stress disorder. Clin
Neuropharmacol. 2013;36(3):94–95.
Kremer I, Vass A, Gorelik I, Bar G, Blanaru M, Javitt DC. Placebocontrolled trial of lamotrigine added to conventional and atypical
antipsychotics in schizophrenia. Biol Psychiatry. 2004;56(6):441–446.
Kushner SF, Khan A, Lane R, Olson WH. Topiramate monotherapy in the
management of acute mania: results of four double-blind placebocontrolled trials. Bipolar Disord. 2006;8(1):15–27.
Livingston C, Rampes H. Lithium: a review of its metabolic adverse effects.
J Psychopharmacol. 2006;20:347–355.
McClellan J, Kowatch R, Findling RL, Work Group on Quality Issues.
Practice parameter for the assessment and treatment of children and
adolescents with bipolar disorder. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry.
2007;46:107–125.
McElroy SL, Hudson JI, Capece JA, Beyers K, Fisher AC. Topiramate for
the treatment of binge eating disorder associated with obesity: a placebocontrolled study. Biol Psychiatry. 2007;61(9):1039–1048.
McElroy SL, Kotwal R, Guerdjikova AI, Welge JA, Nelson EB. Zonisamide
in the treatment of binge eating disorder with obesity: a randomized
controlled trial. J Clin Psychiatry. 2006;67(12):1897–906.
Mease PJ, Russell IJ, Arnold LM. A randomized, double-blind, placebocontrolled, phase III trial of pregabalin in the treatment of patients with
fibromyalgia. J Rheumatol. 2008;35:502–514.
Merideth CH. A single-center, double-blind, placebo-controlled evaluation of
lamotrigine in the treatment of obesity in adults. J Clin Psychiatry.
2006;67(2):258–262.
Nahorski SR. Pharmacology of intracellular signaling pathways. Br J
Pharmacol. 2006;147:S38.
Perucca P, Mula M. Antiepileptic drug effects on mood and behavior:
molecular targets. Epilepsy Behav. 2013;26(3):440–449.
Post RM, Frye MA. Carbamazepine. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds.
Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Vol. 2.
Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:3073.
Post RM, Frye MA. Valproate. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds.




<<<PAGE 2273>>>

Lamotrigine in treatment-resistant schizophrenia: a randomized placebocontrolled crossover trial. Biol Psychiatry. 2003;54(11):1241–1248.
Trankner A, Sander C, Schonknecht P. A critical review of the recent
literature and selected therapy guidelines since 2006 on the use of
lamotrigine in bipolar disorder. Neuropsychiatr Dis Treat. 2013;9:101–
111.
Triggle DJ. Calcium channel antagonists: clinical uses—past, present and
future. Biochem Pharmacol. 2007;74:1–9.
Trinka E, Marson AG, Paesschen WV, Kälviäinen R, Marovac J, Duncan B,
Buyle S, Hallström Y, Hon P, Muscas GC, Newton M, Meencke HJ, Smith
PE, Pohlmann-Eden B, KOMET Study Group. KOMET: an unblinded,
randomised, two parallel group, stratified trial comparing the effectiveness
of levetiracetam with controlled-release carbamazepine and extendedrelease sodium valproate as monotherapy in patients with newly diagnosed
epilepsy. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2013;84(10):1138–1147.
Tritt K, Nickel C, Lahmann C, Leiberich PK, Rother WK. Lamotrigine
treatment of aggression in female borderline-patients: a randomized,
double-blind, placebocontrolled study. J Psychopharmacol. 2005;19(3):287–291.
Viguera AC, Newport DJ, Ritchie J, Stowe Z, Whitfield T. Lithium in breast
milk and nursing infants: clinical implications. Am J Psychiatry.
2007;164:342–345.
Vrielynck P. Current and emerging treatments for absence seizures in young
patients. Neuropsychiatr Dis Treat. 2013;9:963–975.
Wagner KD, Kowatch RA, Emslie GJ, Findling RL, Wilens TE, McCague K.
A doubleblind, randomized, placebo-controlled trial of oxcarbazepine in the
treatment of bipolar disorder in children and adolescents. Am J Psychiatry.
2006;163(7):
1179–1186.
Walz JC, Frey BN, Andreazza AC, Cereser KM, Cacilhas AA. Effects of
lithium and valproate on serum and hippocampal neurotrophin-3 levels in
an animal model of mania. J Psychiatr Res. 2008;42(5):416–421.
Wang HY, Friedman E. Increased association of brain protein kinase C with
the receptor for activated C kinase-1 (RACK1) in bipolar affective
disorder. Biol Psychiatry. 2001;50:364.




<<<PAGE 3677>>>

Laboratory testing and therapeutic blood monitoring, 603
Laboratory testing, in psychiatry. See Medical assessment and laboratory
testing
Lacan, Jacques, 1084
Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), 66
Lamictal. See Lamotrigine
Lamotrigine, 253t, 375, 593, 600
antiseizure effects or efficacy, 659
dosage and administration, 660, 660t
drug interactions, 659–660
pharmacologic actions, 659
precautions and adverse reactions, 659
therapeutic indications, 659
Language
assessment of, 54
competence, 107
development, milestones in, 108t
Language disorders, 47–48, 107–114, 109t, 143
autism spectrum disorder and, 126, 126t
differential diagnosis of, 111t
in DSM-5, 107, 109, 109t
expressive language deficits, 107–111
clinical features, 109
comorbidity, 111
course and prognosis, 110
diagnosis, 109–110
differential diagnosis, 110, 111t
etiology, 111
treatment, 111
mixed receptive and expressive deficits, 112
clinical features, 112
comorbidity, 113
course and prognosis, 113
diagnosis, 112
differential diagnosis, 113


