<<<PAGE 511>>>

affinity for dopamine D2 and serotonin 5-HT2 receptors, is the most wellstudied atypical antipsychotic in the treatment of tics. There is considerable
evidence for its efficacy. Multiple randomized, controlled studies in children
and adolescents have shown favorable results compared to placebo as well as
in head-to-head studies with the typical antipsychotics haloperidol and
pimozide. Risperidone was associated with fewer adverse events compared to
typical antipsychotics; however, it can cause weight gain, metabolic side
effects, and hyperprolactinemia. In a randomized, double-blind, parallelgroup study of Tourette disorder comparing risperidone to pimozide,
risperidone showed superiority in reducing comorbid obsessive-compulsive
symptoms as well as reducing tics. In other randomized clinical trials,
risperidone reduced tics in children, adolescents, and adults with mean daily
doses of 2.5 mg with a range of 1 to 6 mg.
Haloperidol and pimozide are the two most well-investigated and FDAapproved antipsychotic agents in the treatment of Tourette disorder.
However, atypical antipsychotics such as risperidone are often first-line
agents due to their safer side-effect profiles. Both haloperidol and pimozide
are efficacious in multiple randomized clinical trials in the treatment of
Tourette disorder. Both haloperidol and pimozide present significant risks for
extrapyramidal side effects; in a long-term naturalistic follow-up study,
haloperidol produces more significant acute dyskinesia and dystonia
compared to pimozide.
A third typical antipsychotic, fluphenazine, has been used in the United
States for many years in the treatment of tic disorders in the absence of robust
data supporting its efficacy. A small controlled study of fluphenazine,
trifluphenazine, and haloperidol found similar reductions in tics; however,
haloperidol has more extrapyramidal side effects and more sedation. The
frequency of sedation, dystonia, and akathisia of typical antipsychotics,
probably due to their predominant dopaminergic blockade in the nigrostriatal
pathways, limits their use and increases the appeal of the atypical
antipsychotics. Risperidone and pimozide had equal efficacy in one study of
children, adolescents, and adults with Tourette disorder.
Aripiprazole has become a pharmacologic agent of interest in the treatment
of tic disorders due to its mode of action; in addition to its D2 receptor
antagonistic actions, aripiprazole is also a partial D2 and 5-HT1A receptor




<<<PAGE 515>>>

in the same families; this lends support to the view that the disorders are part
of a genetically determined spectrum. The sons of mothers with Tourette
disorder seem to be at the highest risk for the disorder. Evidence in some
families suggests an autosomal dominant transmission for Tourette disorder.
Studies of an extended family pedigree suggest that transmission of Tourette
disorder is bilinear; that is, Tourette disorder appears to be inherited through
an autosomal pattern in some families, intermediate between dominant and
recessive. A study of 174 unrelated probands with Tourette disorder
identified a higher than chance occurrence of a rare sequence variant in
SLITRK1, believed to be a candidate gene on chromosome 13q31.
Up to half of all patients with Tourette disorder also have ADHD, and up
to 40 percent of those with Tourette disorder also have OCD. These frequent
comorbidities with Tourette disorder can lead to a plethora of overlapping
symptoms. Family studies have provided compelling evidence for the
association between tic disorders and OCD. First-degree relatives of persons
with Tourette disorder are at high risk for the development of Tourette
disorder, chronic motor or vocal tic disorder, and OCD. The current
understanding of the genetic bases of Tourette disorder implicates multiple
vulnerability genes that may serve to mediate the type and severity of tics.
Candidate genes associated with Tourette disorder include dopamine receptor
genes, dopamine transporter genes, several noradrenergic genes, and
serotonergic genes.
Neuroimaging Studies. A functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)
study of brain activity 2 seconds before and after a tic found that paralimbic
and sensory association areas were involved. Furthermore, evidence suggests
that voluntary tic suppression involves deactivation of the putamen and
globus pallidus, along with partial activation of regions of the prefrontal
cortex and caudate nucleus. Compelling, but indirect, evidence of dopamine
system involvement in tic disorders includes the observations that
pharmacologic agents that antagonize dopamine (haloperidol, pimozide, and
fluphenazine) suppress tics and that agents that increase central dopaminergic
activity (methylphenidate, amphetamines, and cocaine) tend to exacerbate
tics. The relation of tics to neurotransmitter systems is complex and not yet
well understood; for example, in some cases, antipsychotic medications, such
as haloperidol, are not effective in reducing tics, and the effect of stimulants




<<<PAGE 1137>>>

second-generation and commonly used first generation antipsychotics.
Most guidelines recommend starting with a second-generation
antipsychotic. Although they are likely the most effective for patients with
severe symptoms, and predominantly positive symptoms, they are useful
across a broad range of symptoms and severity. There is little guidance for
choosing a specific medication: some studies suggest they have individual
differences in efficacy. However, the most significant difference between the
drugs is in their side effects, and we should consider these carefully when
choosing a treatment.
Agitation is a typical symptom in the acute phase. Clinicians have several
options for managing agitation that results from psychosis. Antipsychotics
and benzodiazepines can result in a relatively rapid calming of patients. With
highly agitated patients, intramuscular administration of antipsychotics
produces a more rapid effect. An advantage of an antipsychotic is that a
single intramuscular injection of a first- or second-generation antipsychotic
can often calm the patient without excessive sedation. Low-potency
antipsychotics are often associated with sedation and postural hypotension,
mainly when administering them intramuscularly. Intramuscular ziprasidone
and olanzapine are similar to their oral counterparts in not causing substantial
extrapyramidal side effects during acute treatment. This can be a significant
advantage over haloperidol or fluphenazine, which can cause frightening
dystonias or akathisia in some patients. A rapidly dissolving oral formulation
of olanzapine may also be helpful as an alternative to an intramuscular
injection.
Benzodiazepines are also useful for agitation during acute psychosis.
Lorazepam has the advantage of reliable absorption when administering it
either orally or intramuscularly. The use of benzodiazepines may also reduce
the amount of antipsychotic that is needed to control psychotic patients.
Treating Side Effects. Patients frequently experience the side effects of an
antipsychotic before they experience clinical improvement. Whereas a
clinical response may take days or weeks after starting a drug, side effects
may begin almost immediately. First-generation antipsychotics most
commonly cause extrapyramidal side effects, and in the case of low potency,
first-generation antipsychotics, sedation and postural hypotension, whereas
second-generation antipsychotics cause weight gain and metabolic




<<<PAGE 1142>>>

Duration and Prophylaxis
In the stable or maintenance phase, the illness is in a relative stage of
remission. The goals during this phase are to prevent psychotic relapse and to
assist patients in improving their level of functioning. Newer medications,
with a substantially reduced risk of tardive dyskinesia, have diminished one
of the major concerns about long-term treatment. During this phase, patients
are usually in a relative state of remission with only minimal psychotic
symptoms. Stable patients who are maintained on an antipsychotic have a
much lower relapse rate than patients who have their medications
discontinued. Data suggest that 16 to 23 percent of patients receiving
treatment will experience a relapse within 1 year, and 53 to 72 percent will
relapse without medications.
We should maintain patients experiencing a first episode of psychosis for
at least a year. However, such patients still have a high chance of relapsing at
least once over the following 5 years, and some experts believe that 1 year is
inadequate. This is a particular concern when patients have achieved
functional employment status or are involved in educational programs
because they have a lot to lose if they experience another psychotic
decompensation.
For patients experiencing two or more episodes, most experts recommend
that we consider indefinite treatment.
Acute Treatment Failures
Addressing Noncompliance. Noncompliance with long-term
antipsychotic treatment is very high. An estimated 40 to 50 percent of
patients become noncompliant within 1 or 2 years. Long-acting injectable
antipsychotics were developed to help improve adherence, particularly in
patients likely to discontinue daily oral medications. Although there is some
controversy in the literature, the weight of data suggests that long-term depot
formulations do help adherence and decrease relapse, mainly when
considered in real-world settings.
When beginning long-acting drugs, some oral supplementation is
necessary while achieving peak plasma levels. Fluphenazine, haloperidol,
risperidone, paliperidone, aripiprazole, and olanzapine have long-acting




<<<PAGE 1675>>>

Trazodone (Desyrel)b

–

–

Tranylcypromine (Parnate)

+

+

Phenelzine (Nardil)

+

+

Pargyline (Eutonyl)

–

+

Isocarboxazid (Marplan)

–

+

Lithium (Eskalith)

+

+

Amphetamines

+

+

Fluoxetine (Prozac)c

–

+

Fluphenazine (Prolixin)

+

+

Thioridazine (Mellaril)

+

+

Chlorprothixene
(Taractan)

–

+

Mesoridazine (Serentil)

–

+

Perphenazine (Trilafon)

–

+

Trifluoperazine (Stelazine)

–

+

Reserpine (Serpasil)

+

+

Haloperidol (Haldol)

–

+

–

+

Monoamine oxidase inhibitors

Other mood-active drugs

Antipsychoticsd

Antianxiety agente
Chlordiazepoxide
(Librium)
Antihypertensive drugs




<<<PAGE 1681>>>

problem
No obvious nonpharmacologic
precipitant
Dissipates with drug
discontinuation
Antipsychotic drugs and
ejaculatory problems

Perphenazine
Chlorpromazine
Trifluoperazine
Haloperidol
Mesoridazine
Chlorprothixene

Antipsychotic drugs and priapism

Perphenazine
Mesoridazine
Chlorpromazine
Thioridazine
Fluphenazine
Molindone
Risperidone
Clozapine

Table by R. T. Seagraves, M.D.

Because depression is associated with decreased libido, varying levels of
sexual dysfunction and anhedonia are part of the disease process. Some
patients report improved sexual functioning as their depression improves
because of antidepressant medication. The phenomenon makes evaluating
sexual side effects difficult; also, the side effects may disappear with time,
perhaps because a biogenic amine homeostatic mechanism comes into play.




<<<PAGE 1952>>>

dose if tolerated after the patient is in a stable condition. Most DRAs are
highly protein-bound. Parenteral formulation of the DRAs results in a more
rapid and more reliable onset of action. Bioavailability is also up to 10-fold
higher with parenteral administration. Most DRAs are metabolized by
cytochrome P450 (CYP) CYP2D6 and 3A isozymes. However, there are
differences among the specific agents.
Table 21-10
Factors
Influencing
Antipsychotics
Age

the

Pharmacokinetics

of

Elderly patients may demonstrate reduced clearance
rates.

Medical
Decreased hepatic blood flow can reduce clearance.
condition
Hepatic disease can decrease clearance.
Enzyme
inducers

Carbamazepine, phenytoin, ethambutol, barbiturates.

Clearance
Include SSRIs, TCAs, cimetidine, β-blockers, isoniazid,
inhibitors
methylphenidate, erythromycin,
triazolobenzodiazepines, ciprofloxacin, and
ketoconazole.
Changes in Hypoalbuminemia can occur with malnutrition or
binding
hepatic failure.
protein
SSRI, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor; TCA, tricyclic antidepressant.
Adapted from Ereshefsky L. Pharmacokinetics and drug interactions: update for new
antipsychotics. J Clin Psychiatry. 1996;57(Suppl 11):12–25.

Long-acting depot parenteral formulations of haloperidol (Haldol
Decanoate) and fluphenazine are available in the United States. These agents
are usually administered once every 1 to 4 weeks, depending on the dose and
the patient. It can take up to 6 months of treatment with depot formulations to
reach steady-state plasma levels, indicating that oral therapy should be




<<<PAGE 1953>>>

continued during the first month or so of depot antipsychotic treatment.
Antipsychotic activity derives from the inhibition of dopaminergic
neurotransmission. The DRAs are effective when approximately 72 percent
of dopamine D2 receptors in the brain are occupied. The DRAs also block
noradrenergic, cholinergic, and histaminergic receptors, with different drugs
having different effects on these receptor systems.
Some generalizations can be made about the DRAs based on their potency.
Potency refers to the amount of drug that is required to achieve therapeutic
effects. Low-potency drugs such as chlorpromazine and thioridazine
(Mellaril), given in doses of several 100 mg/day, typically produce more
weight gain and sedation than high-potency agents such as haloperidol and
fluphenazine, usually given in doses of less than 10 mg/day. High-potency
agents are also more likely to cause EPS. Some factors influencing the
pharmacologic actions of DRAs are listed in Table 21-10.
Therapeutic Indications
Many types of psychiatric and neurologic disorders may benefit from
treatment with DRAs. Some of these indications are shown in Table 21-11.
Schizophrenia and Schizoaffective Disorder. The DRAs are useful in
both the short- and long-term management of schizophrenia and
schizoaffective disorder. They both reduce acute symptoms and prevent
future exacerbations. These agents produce their most dramatic effects on the
positive symptoms of schizophrenia (e.g., hallucinations, delusions, and
agitation). Negative symptoms (e.g., emotional withdrawal and ambivalence)
are less likely to improve significantly, and they may appear to worsen
because these drugs produce constriction of facial expression and akinesia,
side effects that mimic negative symptoms.
Table 21-11
Indications for Dopamine Receptor Antagonists
Acute psychotic episodes in schizophrenia and schizoaffective
disorder
Maintenance treatment in schizophrenia and schizoaffective




<<<PAGE 1971>>>

patients and take into account their wishes, the severity of their illnesses, and
the quality of their support systems. The clinician needs to know enough
about the patient’s life to try to predict upcoming stressors that might require
increasing the dosage or closely monitoring compliance.
Long-Acting Depot Medications. Long-acting depot preparations may
be needed to overcome problems with compliance. IM preparations are
typically given once every 1 to 4 weeks.
Two depot preparations, a decanoate and an enanthate of fluphenazine, and
a decanoate preparation of haloperidol, are available in the United States. The
preparations are injected IM into an area of extensive muscle tissue, from
which they are absorbed slowly into the blood. Decanoate preparations can
be given less frequently than enanthate preparations because they are
absorbed more slowly. Although stabilizing a person on the oral preparation
of the specific drugs is not necessary before initiating the depot form, it is
good practice to give at least one oral dose of the drug to assess the
possibility of an adverse effect, such as severe EPS or an allergic reaction.
It is reasonable to begin with either 12.5 mg (0.5 mL) of fluphenazine
preparation or 25 mg (0.5 mL) of haloperidol decanoate. If symptoms emerge
in the next 2 to 4 weeks, the person can be treated temporarily with additional
oral medications or with additional small depot injections. After 3 to 4 weeks,
the depot injection can be increased to a single dose equal to the total of the
doses given during the initial period.
A good reason to initiate depot treatment with low doses is that the
absorption of the preparations may be faster than usual at the onset of
treatment, resulting in frightening episodes of dystonia that eventually
discourage compliance with the medication. Some clinicians keep patients
drug free for 3 to 7 days before initiating depot treatment and give small
doses of the depot preparations (3.125 mg of fluphenazine or 6.25 mg of
haloperidol) every few days to avoid those initial problems.
Plasma Concentrations
Genetic differences among persons and pharmacokinetic interactions with
other drugs influence the metabolism of the antipsychotics. If a person has
not improved after 4 to 6 weeks of treatment, the plasma concentration of the




<<<PAGE 2091>>>

Cyclosporine
Desipramine
Dicumarol
Doxepin
Doxycycline
Ethosuximide
Felbamate
Fentanyl
Fluphenazine
Haloperidol
Hormonal contraceptives
Imipramine
Lamotrigine
Methadone
Methsuximide
Methylprednisolone
Nimodipine
Pancuronium
Phensuximide
Phenytoin
Primidone
Theophylline
Valproate
Warfarin
Carbamazepine may increase drug
plasma concentrations of
Clomipramine
Phenytoin
Primidone

Fluoxetine
Fluvoxamine
Gemfibrozil
Itraconazole
Ketoconazole
Isoniazida
Itraconazole
Lamotrigine
Loratadine
Macrolides
Nefazodone
Nicotinamide
Propoxyphene
Terfenadine
Troleandomycin
Valproatea
Verapamil
Viloxazine
Drugs that may decrease
carbamazepine plasma
concentrations
Carbamazepine
(autoinduction)
Cisplatin
Doxorubicin HCl
Felbamate
Phenobarbital
Phenytoin
Primidone
Rifampinb
Theophylline
Valproate

aIncreased concentrations of the active 10,11-epoxide.
bDecreased concentrations of carbamazepine and increased concentrations of the 10,11-

epoxide.
Table by Carlos A. Zarate, Jr., M.D. and Mauricio Tohen, M.D.




<<<PAGE 3656>>>

Flumazenil, 299, 679
Flunitrazepam, 215, 298
Fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH), 96
Fluorescent treponemal antibody absorption (FTA-ABS) test, 66
Fluoxetine, 594, 627–628, 631
for depression in adolescents, 178
Fluphenazine
for schizophrenia, 353t
for Tourette disorder, 160
Fluvoxamine, 627, 628, 631, 632
FMRI gene, 991
Folate levels, serum, 66
Folic acid deficiencies, 938
Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), hormone regulation by, 969
Fölling, Ivar Asbjörn, 102
Ford v. Wainwright, 843
Forensic and legal issues, 836–846
child abuse, 838
child custody, 842
civil liability, 845, 846t
civil rights of patients, 840
communication rights, 841
economic rights, 841
least restrictive alternative, 841
private rights, 841
visitation rights, 841
confidentiality, 837–838
criminal law, 843–845
competence to be executed, 843
competence to stand trial, 843
criminal responsibility, 843–845
guilty but mentally ill, 844f, 845
discussions about patients, 838
durable power of attorney, 843
emotional damage and distress, 845
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act, 846
high-risk clinical situations


