<<<PAGE 1305>>>

of severe anxiety symptoms. In those cases, a short-term benzodiazepine,
such as lorazepam or alprazolam, is helpful in the short term. Concurrently,
an SSRI should be started and slowly increased.
For panic disorder, SSRIs or the serotonin–norepinephrine reuptake
inhibitor (SNRI) venlafaxine are first-line options. Tricyclic antidepressants
or MAOIs are effective but less preferably given their side effects. Other
agents, such as mirtazapine, are other second-line options. As mentioned, the
benzodiazepines are effective options but mainly used for short-term use or
exacerbations. Long-term antidepressant therapy is useful for preventing
relapse, with studies suggesting that the beneficial effects last for up to 1 to 3
years. When appropriate, maintenance therapy should be discontinued very
slowly.
For generalized anxiety disorder, the approach is similar, with SSRIs and
SNRIs being the first-line treatments. Reasonable alternatives if those are not
effective include agomelatine, pregabalin, buspirone, and quetiapine.
For social anxiety disorder, the approach is similar to those already
described, with SSRIs and SNRIs being the first-line choice. Pregabalin and
clonazepam also have strong evidence, although the same caveats for other
benzodiazepines apply to clonazepam. Phenelzine is effective as well but is
rarely used because of the side effects. Tricyclic antidepressants, buspirone,
and quetiapine are not recommended owing to their side effects. As noted
above, β-blockers may be useful for performance anxiety. However, their use
does not appear to generalize to other types of social anxiety.
Table 8-6
Evidence-Based Recommendations for Monotherapy of
Anxiety Disorders
Anxiety Disorders
Classes and
Agents

GAD

PD

SAD

SSRIs

First line

First line

First line

SNRIs

First line

First line

First line

TCAs

Second line

Second line

Not




<<<PAGE 1306>>>

recommended
MAOIs

Insufficient
evidence

Second line

Second line

RIMA-Moclobemide Insufficient
evidence

Insufficient
evidence

Second Line

Other Psychotropics Second line
—Agomelatine,
Buspirone,
Mirtazapine

Second line

Second line

Benzodiazepines

Second line

Second line

Second line

Atypical
Second line
Antipsychotics—
Quetiapine

Insufficient
evidence

Not
recommended

Anticonvulsant—
Pregabalin

Insufficient
evidence

Second line

Second line

Note: Beta-adrenergic blocking agents are recommended only for performance anxiety.
RIMA, reversible monoamine oxidase inhibitor; GAD, generalized anxiety disorder; PD, panic
disorder; SAD, social anxiety disorder.

In the case of specific phobia, psychotherapies, particularly behavioral
therapies, are the first-line choice. SSRIs may be helpful, although there are
few studies of SSRIs for this disorder.
For agoraphobia, the main goal of pharmacotherapy is to treat the panic
attacks that are usually comorbid. Early studies did not support the use of
medications for “pure” agoraphobia; however, there has been little research
since.
Psychosocial Therapies
There is strong support for a variety of psychosocial therapies for anxiety
disorders, including cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT), behavioral
therapies, and interpersonal therapy. Studies of CBT suggest it has a
substantial effect on generalized anxiety disorder, panic disorder, and social
anxiety disorder, although this evidence is tempered by concerns about




<<<PAGE 1318>>>

subtypes under
development
Note: Gabapentin
and pregabalin
although
structurally
related to GAB
do not act on
GABA receptor
Glutamate

Amygdala,
hippocampus,
frontal and
cingulate
cortices

Possible imbalance Efficacy of DCS as
between tonic
adjunct to
GABAergic
exposure
inhibition and
therapy for
glutamateacrophobia, SA
mediated
and PD
excitation in PD Glycine transporte
inhibitors under
study
Metabotropic
receptor
modulators
under study
NMDA receptor
antagonism as
potential
anxiolytic—
preliminary
efficacy of
riluzole for GAD

Neuropeptide Y
(NPY)

Amygdala,
hippocampus,
brainstem,
nucleus
accumbens,

Low NPY levels in Intranasal
PTSD, less well
administration
studied in
may reduce
anxiety disorders
anxiety, under
investigation




<<<PAGE 1323>>>

(12):CD008120.
Dresler T, Guhn A, Tupak SV, Ehlis A-C, Herrmann MJ, Fallgatter AJ,
Deckert J, Domschke K. Revise the revised? New dimensions of the
neuroanatomical hypothesis of panic disorder. J Neural Transm (Vienna).
2013;120(1):3–29.
Fentz HN, Hoffart A, Jensen MB, Arendt M, O’Toole MS, Rosenberg NK,
Hougaard E. Mechanisms of change in cognitive behaviour therapy for
panic disorder: The role of panic self-efficacy and catastrophic
misinterpretations. Behav Res Ther. 2013;51:579–587.
Funayama T, Furukawa TA, Nakano Y, Noda Y, Ogawa S, Watanabe N,
Chen J, Noguchi Y. In-situation safety behaviors among patients with
panic disorder: Descriptive and correlational study. Psych Clin Neurosci.
2013;67:332–339.
Generoso MB, Trevizol AP, Kasper S, Cho HJ, Cordeiro Q, Shiozawa P.
Pregabalin for generalized anxiety disorder: An updated systematic review
and meta-analysis. Int Clin Psychopharmacol. 2017;32(1):49–55.
Goodwin RD, Stein DJ. Anxiety disorders and drug dependence: Evidence on
sequence and specificity among adults. Psych Clin Neurosci. 2013;67:167–
173.
Gorman JM, Kent JM, Sullivan GM, Coplan JD. Neuroanatomical hypothesis
of panic disorder, revised. Am J Psychiatry. 2000;157(4):493–505.
Gorman JM, Liebowitz MR, Fyer AJ, Stein J. A neuroanatomical hypothesis
for panic disorder. Am J Psychiatry. 1989;146(2):148–161.
Hamm AO. Specific phobias. Psychiatr Clin North Am. 2009;32(3):577.
Hasin DS, Grant BF. The National Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and
Related Conditions (NESARC) Waves 1 and 2: Review and summary of
findings. Soc Psychiatry Psychiatr Epidemiol. 2015;50(11):1609–1640.
Hofmann SG, Hinton DE. Cross-cultural aspects of anxiety disorders. Curr
Psychiatry Rep. 2014;16(6):450.
Julian LJ. Measures of anxiety. Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken) [Internet].
2011 Nov [cited November 24, 2019];63(0 11):5467–5472. Available
from: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3879951/
Khalsa SS, Feinstein JS, Li W, Feusner JD, Adolphs R, Hurlemann R. Panic
anxiety in humans with bilateral amygdala lesions: Pharmacological
induction via cardiorespiratory interoceptive pathways. J Neurosci.
2016;36(12):3559–3566.




<<<PAGE 1638>>>

assuring sufficient sleep are first-line therapies. Sometimes, if the individual
voluntarily makes very–rapid eye movements or is touched by another
person, the episode will usually terminate.
Sleep Enuresis. Treating sleep enuresis involves medication, behavioral
interventions, or both. Among medications, desmopressin acetate is the
preferred choice. Other medications used to treat sleep enuresis include
imipramine and oxybutynin chloride. Behavioral treatments, including
bladder training, using conditioning devices (bell and pad), diet modification,
and fluid restriction, have reported success when properly administered.
Other treatments include psychotherapy, motivational strategies, and
hypnotherapy.
Restless Legs Syndrome. Pharmacologically, the dopaminergic agonists
pramipexole, rotigotine, and ropinirole are FDA approved and represent the
treatment of choice. Other agents used to treat RLS include dopamine
precursors (e.g., levodopa), benzodiazepines, opiates (including prolongedrelease oxycodone–naloxone), and antiepileptic drugs (e.g., gabapentin,
pregabalin). When iron deficiency is present, or when ferritin levels are low,
iron supplementation can also be helpful. Nonpharmacologic treatment
includes avoiding alcohol or nicotine use close to bedtime, massaging the
affected parts of the legs, taking hot baths, applying hot or cold to the
affected areas, magnetic or electric stimulation therapy, and moderate
exercise.
Periodic Limb Movement Disorder Treatment. Pharmacotherapy for
PLMD associated with RLS is the same as for RLS. Clinical trials of
pharmacotherapy for other forms of PLMD are lacking. However,
benzodiazepines, especially clonazepam, reportedly improve sleep in patients
with PLMD.
Sleep-Related Bruxism. The usual treatment involves having the patient
wear an oral appliance to protect the teeth during sleep. There are two basic
types of appliances: the soft one (mouth guard) is typically used in the short
term, whereas the hard acrylic one (bite splint) is used long term and requires
regular follow-up. Relaxation, biofeedback, hypnosis, physical therapy, and




<<<PAGE 1815>>>

Table 19-12
Pharmacotherapy of
Personality Disorders

Target

Symptom

Domains

of

Choice of Drugs According to Target Symptoms of Personality
Disorders
Target Symptom

Drug/Treatment of
Choice

Not
Recommended

I. Mood Dysregulation and Anxiety
Anxiety
Chronic cognitive

Psychotherapy,
Benzodiazepines
SSRIs, SNRIs,
MAOIs, Low-Dose
Novel
Psychotropics
(aripiprazole,
quetiapine)
Valproate and other
GABA analogs
(clonazepam and
buspirone)

Chronic somatic

MAOIs, SNRIs
(duloxetine,
milnacipran)
Pregabalin and other
GABA analogs,
TCAs, betablockers

Obsessions

SSRIs, Antipsychotics
(quetiapine), TCAs
(clomipramine),
Mild NMDA
antagonists

If used—
benzodiazepines
with long half-life
and short trials
preferred




<<<PAGE 2097>>>

OTHER ANTICONVULSANTS
The anticonvulsants described in this section were developed for the
treatment of epilepsy but were also found to have beneficial effects in
psychiatric disorders. Also, these agents are used as skeletal muscle relaxants
and in neurogenic pain. These drugs have a variety of mechanisms, including
increasing GABAergic function or decreasing glutamatergic function. This
section includes seven anticonvulsants: gabapentin (Neurontin), levetiracetam
(Keppra), pregabalin (Lyrica), tiagabine (Gabitril), topiramate (Topamax),
and zonisamide (Zonegran), as well as one of the first used anticonvulsants,
phenytoin (Dilantin). Carbamazepine (Tegretol), valproate (Depakene,
Depakote), lamotrigine (Lamictal), and oxcarbazepine (Trileptal) are
discussed in separate sections.
In 2008, the FDA issued a warning that these drugs may increase the risk
of suicidal ideation or act in some persons compared with placebo; however,
the relative risk for suicidality was higher in patients with epilepsy compared
with those with psychiatric disorders. However, some published data
contradict this warning. These studies suggest that anticonvulsants may have
a protective effect on suicidal thoughts in bipolar disorder. Considering the
inherently increased risk of suicide in persons with bipolar disorder,
clinicians should be aware of these warnings.
Gabapentin
Gabapentin was first introduced as an antiepileptic drug and was found to
have sedative effects that were useful in some psychiatric disorders,
especially insomnia. It was also found to be beneficial in reducing
neuropathic pain, including postherpetic neuralgia. It is used in anxiety
disorders (social phobia and panic disorder), but not as the primary
intervention in mania or treatment-resistant mood disorders.
Pharmacologic Actions. Gabapentin circulates in the blood primarily
unbound and is not appreciably metabolized in humans. It is eliminated
unchanged by renal excretion and can be removed by hemodialysis. Food
only moderately affects the rate and extent of absorption. Clearance is
decreased in elderly persons, requiring dosage adjustments. Gabapentin




<<<PAGE 2104>>>

efficiently dosed once daily, preferably at nighttime.
Therapeutic Indications. Its primary use is in the treatment of generalized
seizure disorders and refractory partial seizures. In psychiatry, controlled
studies found it to be of use in obesity and binge-eating disorder.
Uncontrolled trials have found it useful in bipolar disorder, particularly
mania; however, further studies are warranted for this indication.
Precautions and Adverse Reactions. Zonisamide is a sulfonamide and
thus may cause a fatal rash and blood dyscrasias, although these events are
rare. About 4 percent of patients develop kidney stones. The most common
side effects are drowsiness, cognitive impairment, insomnia, ataxia,
nystagmus, paresthesia, speech abnormalities, constipation, diarrhea, nausea,
and dry mouth. Weight loss is also a common side effect, which has been
exploited as a therapy for patients who have gained weight during treatment
with psychotropics or, as mentioned above, have ongoing difficulty
controlling their eating. Zonisamide should not be used in pregnant women or
breastfeeding mothers.
Drug Interactions. Zonisamide does not inhibit CYP isoenzymes and does
not instigate drug interactions. It is important not to combine carbonic
anhydrase inhibitors with zonisamide because of an increased risk of
nephrolithiasis related to increased blood levels of urea.
Laboratory Interferences. Zonisamide can elevate hepatic alkaline
phosphatase and increase blood urea nitrogen and creatinine.
Dosages and Clinical Guidelines. Zonisamide is available in 100- and
200-mg capsules. In epilepsy, the dosage range is 100 to 400 mg/day, with
side effects becoming more pronounced at doses above 300 mg. Because of
its long half-life, zonisamide can be given once a day.
Pregabalin
Pregabalin is pharmacologically similar to gabapentin. It is believed to work
by inhibiting the release of excess excitatory neurotransmitters. It increases
neuronal GABA levels, its binding affinity is six times greater than that of




<<<PAGE 2105>>>

gabapentin, and it has a longer half-life.
Pharmacologic Actions. Pregabalin exhibits linear pharmacokinetics. It is
rapidly absorbed in proportion to its dose. The time to maximal plasma
concentration is about 1 hour, and to steady state is within 24 to 48 hours.
Pregabalin demonstrates high bioavailability, and it has a mean elimination
half-life of about 6.5 hours. Food does not affect absorption. Pregabalin does
not bind to plasma proteins and is excreted virtually unchanged (<2 percent
metabolism) by the kidneys. It is not subject to hepatic metabolism and does
not induce or inhibit liver enzymes. Dose reduction may be necessary for
patients with creatinine clearance (CLcr) less than 60 mL/min. Daily doses
should be further reduced by approximately 50 percent for each additional 50
percent decrease in CLcr. Pregabalin is highly cleared by hemodialysis so
that additional doses may be needed for patients on chronic hemodialysis
treatment after each hemodialysis treatment.
Therapeutic Indications. Pregabalin is approved for the management of
diabetic peripheral neuropathy and postherpetic neuralgia and adjunctive
treatment of partial-onset seizures. It is of benefit to some patients with GAD.
In studies, no consistent dose–response relationship was found, although 300
mg of pregabalin per day was more effective than 150 or 450 mg. Some
patients with panic disorder or social anxiety disorder may benefit from
pregabalin, but little evidence supports its routine use in treating persons with
these disorders. It was most recently approved for the treatment of
fibromyalgia.
Precautions and Adverse Reactions. The most common adverse events
associated with pregabalin use are dizziness, somnolence, blurred vision,
peripheral edema, amnesia or loss of memory, and tremors. Pregabalin
potentiates the sedating effects of alcohol, antihistamines, benzodiazepines,
and other CNS depressants. It remains to be seen if pregabalin is associated
with benzodiazepine-type withdrawal symptoms. There are scant data about
its use in pregnant women or nursing mothers, and it is best avoided in these
patients.
Drug Interactions. Given the absence of hepatic metabolism, pregabalin




<<<PAGE 2106>>>

lacks metabolic drug interactions.
Laboratory Interferences. There are no effects on laboratory tests.
Dosage and Clinical Guidelines. The recommended dose for
postherpetic neuralgia is 50 or 100 mg orally three times a day. The
recommended dose for diabetic peripheral neuropathy is 100 to 200 mg orally
three times a day. Patients with fibromyalgia may require up to 450 to 600
mg/day given in divided doses. Pregabalin is available as 25-, 50-, 75-, 100-,
150-, 200-, 225-, and 300-mg capsules.
Phenytoin
Phenytoin sodium (Dilantin) is an antiepileptic drug and is related to the
barbiturates in chemical structure. It is indicated for the control of generalized
tonic–clonic (grand mal) and complex partial (psychomotor, temporal lobe)
seizures and prevention and treatment of seizures occurring during or after
neurosurgery. Studies have shown comparable efficacy of phenytoin to other
anticonvulsants in bipolar disorder, but clinicians should take into account the
danger of gingival hyperplasia, leukopenia, or anemia and the danger of
toxicity caused by nonlinear pharmacokinetics.
Pharmacologic Action. Similar to other anticonvulsants, phenytoin causes
blockade of voltage-activated sodium channels and hence is efficacious as an
antimanic agent. The plasma half-life after oral administration averages 22
hours, with a range of 7 to 42 hours. Steady-state therapeutic levels are
achieved at least 7 to 10 days (5 to 7 half-lives) after initiation of therapy,
with recommended doses of 300 mg/day. Serum level should be obtained at
least 5 to 7 half-lives after treatment initiation. Phenytoin is excreted in the
bile, which is then reabsorbed from the intestinal tract and excreted in the
urine. Urinary excretion of phenytoin occurs partly with glomerular filtration
and by tubular secretion. Small incremental doses of phenytoin may increase
the half-life and produce very substantial increases in serum levels. Patients
should adhere strictly to the prescribed dosage, and serial monitoring of
phenytoin levels is recommended.
Therapeutic Indications. Apart from its indication in generalized tonic–




<<<PAGE 2267>>>

Benedetti A, Lattanzi L, Pini S, Musetti L, Dell’Osso L. Oxcarbazepine as
add-on treatment in patients with bipolar manic, mixed, or depressive
episode. J Affect Disord. 2004;79:273–277.
Bialer M. Extended-release formulations for the treatment of epilepsy. CNS
Drugs. 2007;21:765–774.
Bowden CL, Swann AC, Calabrese JR, Rubenfaer LM, Wozniak PJ.
Depakote ER Mania Study Group. A randomized, placebo-controlled,
multicenter study of divalproex sodium extended release in the treatment
of acute mania. J Clin Psychiatry. 2006;67:1501.
Bray GA, Hollander P, Klein S, Kushner R, Levy B. A 6-month randomized,
placebo-controlled, dose-ranging trial of topiramate for weight loss in
obesity. Obes Res. 2003;11(6):722–733.
Calabrese JR, Huffman RF, White RL. Lamotrigine in the acute treatment of
bipolar depression: results of five double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical
trials. Bipolar Disord. 2008;10:323–333.
Chen PS, Wang CC, Bortner CD, Peng GS, Wu X, Pang H. Valproic acid and
other histone deacetylase inhibitors induce microglial apoptosis and
attenuate lipopolysaccharide-induced dopaminergic neurotoxicity.
Neuroscience. 2007;149:203–212.
Chustecka Z. Hydralazine and valproate appear to overcome resistance to
chemotherapy. Ann Oncol. 2007;18:1529.
Cipriani A, Hawton K, Stockton S, Geddes JR. Lithium in the prevention of
suicide in mood disorders: updated systematic review and meta-analysis.
BMJ. 2013;346: f3646.
Cohen LS, Friedman JM, Jefferson JW, Johnson EM, Weiner ML. A
reevaluation of risk of in utero exposure to lithium. JAMA. 1994;271:146–
150.
Collins J, McFarland B. Divalproex, lithium and suicide among medicaid
patients with bipolar disorder. J Affect Dis. 2008;107:23–28.
Cousins DA, Aribisala B, Ferrier I, Blamire AM. Lithium, gray matter, and
magnetic resonance imaging signal. Biol Psychiatry. 2013;73(7):652–657.
Crofford LJ, Rowbotham MC, Mease PJ, Russell IJ, Dworkin RH. Pregabalin
for the treatment of fibromyalgia syndrome: results of a randomized,
double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Arthritis Rheum. 2005;52(4):1264.
Delvendahl I, Lindemann H, Heidegger T, Normann C, Ziemann U, Mall V.
Effects of lamotrigine on human motor cortex plasticity. Clin




<<<PAGE 2268>>>

Neurophysiol. 2013;124(1):
148–153.
Du J, Suzuki K, Wei Y, Wang Y, Blumenthal R. The anticonvulsants
lamotrigine, riluzole, and valproate differentially regulate AMPA receptor
membrane localization: Relationship to clinical effects in mood disorders.
Neuropsychopharmacology. 2007;32:793–802.
Dubovsky SL. Calcium channel inhibitors. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz
P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed.
Vol. 2. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:3065.
Dubovsky SL, Buzan RD, Thomas M, Kassner C, Cullum CM. Nicardipine
improves the antidepressant action of ECT but does not improve cognition.
J ECT. 2001;17:
3–10.
Einat H, Manji HK. Cellular plasticity cascades: genes-to-behavior pathways
in animal models of bipolar disorder. Biol Psychiatry. 2006;59:1160–1171.
Findling RL, Frazier TW, Youngstrom EA, McNamara NK, Stansbrey RJ.
Doubleblind, placebo-controlled trial of divalproex monotherapy in the treatment
of symptomatic youth at high risk for developing bipolar disorder. J Clin
Psychiatry. 2007;68:781–788.
Freeman R, Durso-Decruz E, Emir B. Efficacy, safety, and tolerability of
pregabalin treatment for painful diabetic peripheral neuropathy: findings
from seven randomized, controlled trials across a range of doses. Diabetes
Care. 2008;31:1448–1454.
Frye MA, Ketter TA, Kimbrell TA, Dunn RT, Speer AM. A placebocontrolled study of lamotrigine and gabapentin monotherapy in refractory
mood disorders. J Clin Psychopharmacol. 2000;20(6):607–614.
Gadde KM, Franciscy DM, Wagner HR 2nd, Krishnan KR. Zonisamide for
weight loss in obese adults: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA.
2003;289(14):1820–1825.
Geddes JR, Burgess S, Hawton K, Jamison K, Goodwin GM. Long-term
lithium therapy for bipolar disorder: systematic review and meta-analysis
of randomized controlled trials. Am J Psychiatry. 2004;161:217–222.
Geddes JR, Calabrese JR, Goodwin GM. Lamotrigine for treatment of bipolar
depression: Independent meta-analysis and meta-regression of individual
patient data from five randomised trials. Br J Psychiatry. 2009;194:4.




<<<PAGE 2270>>>

Jefferson JW, Greist JH. Lithium. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds.
Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Vol. 2.
Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:3132
Johnson BA, Rosenthal N, Capece JA. Improvement of physical health and
quality of life of alcohol-dependent individuals with topiramate treatment:
US multisite randomized controlled trial. Arch Intern Med.
2008;168:1188–1199.
Johnson BA, Rosenthal N, Capece JA, Wiegand F, Mao L. Topiramate for
treating alcohol dependence: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA.
2007;298(14):1641.
Kamalinia G, Brand S, Ghaeli P, Abedi N, Bajoghli H, Sharifi V, Zahiroddin
A, Amini M, Rouini MR, Holsboer-Trachsler E, Mohammadpoor AH.
Serum levels of sodium valproate in patients suffering from bipolar
disorders: comparing acute and maintenance phases of mania.
Pharmacopsychiatry. 2013;46(3):83–87.
Kato T, Ishiwata M, Mori K, Washizuka S, Tajima O. Mechanisms of altered
Ca2+ signaling in transformed lymphoblastoid cells from patients with
bipolar disorder. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol. 2003;6:379–389.
Ketter TA, Brooks JO, Hoblyn JC. Effectiveness of lamotrigine in bipolar
disorder in a clinical setting. J Psychiatr Res. 2008;43:13–23.
Ketter TA, Greist JH, Graham JA, Roberts JN, Thompson TR. The effect of
dermatologic precautions on the incidence of rash with addition of
lamotrigine in the treatment of bipolar I disorder: a randomized trial. J Clin
Psychiatry. 2006;67(3):400–406.
Ketter TA, Wang PW. Anticonvulsants: Gabapentin, levetiracetam,
pregabalin, tiagabine, topiramate, zonisamide. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA,
Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry.
9th ed. Vol. 2. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins;
2009:3021.
Ketter TA, Wang PW. Lamotrigine. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds.
Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Vol. 2.
Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:3127.
Ketter TA, Wang PW, Becker OV, Nowakowska C, Yang YS. The diverse
roles of anticonvulsants in bipolar disorders. Ann Clin Psychiatry.
2003;15:95–108.
Klitgaard H. Epilepsy therapy: anticonvulsants, lessons learned and unmet




<<<PAGE 2271>>>

medical needs. Expert Rev Neurother. 2013;13(1):13–14.
Kozaric-Kovacic D, Eterovic M. Lamotrigine abolished aggression in a
patient with treatment-resistant posttraumatic stress disorder. Clin
Neuropharmacol. 2013;36(3):94–95.
Kremer I, Vass A, Gorelik I, Bar G, Blanaru M, Javitt DC. Placebocontrolled trial of lamotrigine added to conventional and atypical
antipsychotics in schizophrenia. Biol Psychiatry. 2004;56(6):441–446.
Kushner SF, Khan A, Lane R, Olson WH. Topiramate monotherapy in the
management of acute mania: results of four double-blind placebocontrolled trials. Bipolar Disord. 2006;8(1):15–27.
Livingston C, Rampes H. Lithium: a review of its metabolic adverse effects.
J Psychopharmacol. 2006;20:347–355.
McClellan J, Kowatch R, Findling RL, Work Group on Quality Issues.
Practice parameter for the assessment and treatment of children and
adolescents with bipolar disorder. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry.
2007;46:107–125.
McElroy SL, Hudson JI, Capece JA, Beyers K, Fisher AC. Topiramate for
the treatment of binge eating disorder associated with obesity: a placebocontrolled study. Biol Psychiatry. 2007;61(9):1039–1048.
McElroy SL, Kotwal R, Guerdjikova AI, Welge JA, Nelson EB. Zonisamide
in the treatment of binge eating disorder with obesity: a randomized
controlled trial. J Clin Psychiatry. 2006;67(12):1897–906.
Mease PJ, Russell IJ, Arnold LM. A randomized, double-blind, placebocontrolled, phase III trial of pregabalin in the treatment of patients with
fibromyalgia. J Rheumatol. 2008;35:502–514.
Merideth CH. A single-center, double-blind, placebo-controlled evaluation of
lamotrigine in the treatment of obesity in adults. J Clin Psychiatry.
2006;67(2):258–262.
Nahorski SR. Pharmacology of intracellular signaling pathways. Br J
Pharmacol. 2006;147:S38.
Perucca P, Mula M. Antiepileptic drug effects on mood and behavior:
molecular targets. Epilepsy Behav. 2013;26(3):440–449.
Post RM, Frye MA. Carbamazepine. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds.
Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Vol. 2.
Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:3073.
Post RM, Frye MA. Valproate. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds.


