<<<PAGE 881>>>

term behavioral change (rehabilitation); whether the program makes
extensive use of pharmacologic interventions; and whether the program
mainly uses individual therapy, Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) or other 12step principles, or therapeutic community principles. For example, the
National Institute on Drug Abuse suggested the following categories of
treatment: long-term residential treatment, short-term residential treatment,
outpatient treatment programs, individualized drug counseling, group
counseling, and treatments for individuals involved in the criminal justice
system.
Selecting a Treatment
Not all interventions apply to all types of substance use disorders, and some
of the more coercive interventions used for illicit drugs do not apply to legal
substances, such as tobacco. Addictive behaviors do not change abruptly but
through a series of stages. Experts propose five stages in this gradual process:
precontemplation, contemplation, preparation, action, and maintenance. For
some types of addictions, the therapeutic alliance improves when the
treatment approach is tailored to the patient’s stage of readiness to change.
Interventions for some drug use disorders may have a specific pharmacologic
agent as a critical component; for example, disulfiram, naltrexone, or
acamprosate for alcoholism; methadone, levomethadyl acetate, or
buprenorphine for heroin addiction; and nicotine delivery devices,
varenicline, or bupropion for tobacco dependence.
In general, brief interventions (e.g., a few weeks of detoxification, whether
in or out of a hospital) used for persons who are severely dependent on illicit
opioids have limited effect on outcome measured a few months later.
Substantial reductions in illicit drug use, antisocial behaviors, and psychiatric
distress among patients dependent on cocaine or heroin are much more likely
following treatment lasting at least 3 months. Such a time-in-treatment effect
occurs across very different modalities, from residential therapeutic
communities to ambulatory methadone maintenance programs. Although
some patients appear to benefit from a few days or weeks of treatment, a
substantial percentage of users of illicit drugs drop out (or are dropped) from
treatment before they have achieved significant benefits.
Treatment outcomes vary widely; this is partly due to the great variety of




<<<PAGE 910>>>

mg of chlordiazepoxide given every 4 hours orally, or lorazepam, given
intravenously (IV) if oral medication is not possible. A high-calorie, highcarbohydrate diet supplemented by multivitamins is also essential.
Physically restraining patients with the DTs is risky; they may fight against
the restraints to a dangerous level of exhaustion. When patients are disorderly
and uncontrollable, it may be preferable to use a seclusion room. Adjunctive
antipsychotic medications, such as haloperidol, are sometimes used to control
severe agitation and hallucinations. However, antipsychotic medications may
reduce the seizure threshold in patients. Dehydration, often exacerbated by
diaphoresis and fever, can be corrected with fluids given by mouth or IV.
Anorexia, vomiting, and diarrhea often occur during withdrawal. The
emergence of focal neurologic symptoms, lateralizing seizures, increased
intracranial pressure, or evidence of skull fractures or other indications of
CNS pathology should prompt clinicians to examine a patient for neurologic
disease.
Warm, supportive psychotherapy in the treatment of DTs is essential.
Patients are often bewildered, frightened, and anxious because of their
tumultuous symptoms, and skillful verbal support is imperative.
Protracted Withdrawal. Symptoms of anxiety, insomnia, and mild
autonomic overactivity are likely to continue for 2 to 6 months after the acute
withdrawal has disappeared. These protracted withdrawal symptoms may
enhance the probability of relapse. Although there is little evidence that
medications are helpful, it is possible that some of the medications used for
the rehabilitation phase, especially acamprosate, may work by diminishing
some of these symptoms. The clinician should warn the patient that some
level of sleep problems or feelings of nervousness might remain after acute
withdrawal and discuss cognitive and behavioral approaches that might be
appropriate to help the patient feel comfortable.
Rehabilitation
For most patients, rehabilitation includes three major components, which are
listed in Table 4-13. These components happen at a difficult time: the patient
may still be experiencing withdrawal symptoms as well as life crises.
Repetition will be necessary, with frequent reminders of how vital abstinence




<<<PAGE 914>>>

Interventions) demonstrated that naltrexone improves clinical outcomes, and
a Cochrane review of naltrexone concluded that naltrexone was effective in
reducing heavy drinking days. The typical dose is 50 mg/day, and side effects
include mild GI upset and lethargy.
The second medication, acamprosate, antagonizes neuronal overactivity
related to the excitatory neurotransmitter glutamate, at least in part, by acting
as an antagonist to N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptors. Acamprosate
may diminish mild anxiety, mood swings, and other sleep difficulties
associated with the protracted withdrawal syndrome observed after the first 4
to 5 days of abstinence. The typical dose is about 2,000 mg divided into three
doses per day and is associated with relatively mild side effects of GI
problems such as diarrhea.
A third possible drug of interest is the alcohol-sensitizing agent disulfiram.
Disulfiram is given in daily doses of 250 mg before discharging the patient
from the intensive first phase of outpatient rehabilitation or inpatient care.
The goal is to place the patient in a condition in which drinking alcohol
precipitates an uncomfortable physical reaction, including nausea, vomiting,
and a burning sensation in the face and stomach. Few data support
disulfiram’s effectiveness, most likely because patients stop it when they
resume drinking. Many clinicians have stopped routinely prescribing the
agent, partly in recognition of the dangers associated with the drug itself:
mood swings, rare instances of psychosis, the possibility of increased
peripheral neuropathies, the relatively rare occurrence of other significant
neuropathies, and potentially fatal hepatitis. Moreover, we should not give
disulfiram to patients with preexisting heart disease, cerebral thrombosis,
diabetes, and some other conditions, because an alcohol reaction to the
disulfiram could be fatal.
Table 4-15 gives a summary of medications used for alcohol dependence.
Two other medications, while not yet approved for the treatment of alcohol
use disorders, are worth brief mention. Several studies using the
anticonvulsant topiramate have reported improvement in drinking patterns.
Additionally, some data suggest that the 5-HT3 ondansetron might be
beneficial in alcohol use disorder treatment. No evidence exists that
antidepressant medications, such as selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
(SSRIs), lithium, or antipsychotic medications, are significantly effective in




<<<PAGE 916>>>

Medications for Treating Alcohol Dependence

Action

Naltrexone

Acamprosate

Disulfiram

Blocks opioid
receptors,
resulting in
reduced
craving and
reduced
reward in
response to
drinking

Not well
Inhibits
understood.
intermediate
Likely an NMDA
metabolism of
receptor
alcohol,
antagonist and
causing a
positive allosteric
buildup of
modulator of
acetaldehyde
GABAa receptors
and a reaction
of flushing,
sweating,
nausea, and
tachycardia if a
patient drinks
alcohol

Contraindications Currently using Severe renal
Concomitant use
opioids or in
impairment (CrCl
of alcohol or
acute opioid
≤30 mL/min)
alcoholwithdrawal;
containing
anticipated
preparations or
need for
metronidazole;
opioid
coronary artery
analgesics;
disease; severe
acute
myocardial
hepatitis or
disease
liver failure
Precautions

Other hepatic
disease;
renal
impairment;
history of

Moderate renal
High impulsivity—
impairment
likely to drink
(dose
while using it;
adjustment for
psychoses
CrCl between 30
(current or




<<<PAGE 2184>>>

Rapid Detoxification. Rapid detoxification has been standardized using
naltrexone, although nalmefene would be expected to be equally effective
with fewer adverse effects. In rapid detoxification protocols, the addicted
person stops opioid use abruptly and begins the first opioid-free day by
taking clonidine 0.2 mg orally every 2 hours for nine doses, to a maximum
dose of 1.8 mg, during which time the BP is monitored every 30 to 60
minutes for the first 8 hours. Naltrexone 12.5 mg is administered 1 to 3 hours
after the first dose of clonidine. To reduce muscle cramps and later insomnia,
a short-acting benzodiazepine, such as oxazepam 30 to 60 mg, is
administered simultaneously with the first dose of clonidine, and half of the
initial dose is readministered every 4 to 6 hours as needed. The maximum
daily dosage of oxazepam should not exceed 180 mg. The person undergoing
rapid detoxification should be accompanied home by a reliable escort. On the
second day, similar doses of clonidine and the benzodiazepine are
administered but with a single dose of naltrexone 25 mg taken in the
morning. Relatively asymptomatic persons may return home after 3 to 4
hours. Administration of the daily maintenance dose of 50 mg of naltrexone
is begun on the third day, and the dosages of clonidine and the
benzodiazepine are gradually tapered off over 5 to 10 days.

DISULFIRAM AND ACAMPROSATE
Disulfiram (Antabuse) and acamprosate (Campral) are drugs used to treat
alcohol use disorder. Disulfiram has suffered from a reputation as a
dangerous medication only suitable for highly motivated and strictly
supervised drinkers because of the severe physical reactions the drug causes
after drinking. Experience has shown, however, that at recommended doses,
it is an acceptable and safe medication for dependent drinkers seeking to
sustain abstinence. The properties that constitute disulfiram’s main
therapeutic effect (i.e., the ability to produce unpleasant symptoms after
alcohol intake, also known as disulfiram–alcohol reaction) have created that
perception of dangerousness.
In the most severe cases, when disulfiram is combined with alcohol, severe
clinical conditions can occur. These include respiratory depression,
cardiovascular collapse, acute heart failure, convulsions, loss of
consciousness, and death in rare cases. These potential complications, as well




<<<PAGE 2185>>>

as the development of alternative antialcohol medications, have been the
limiting factors for the broader use of disulfiram. Unlike disulfiram,
acamprosate, the other drug discussed in this section, does not produce
aversive side effects. Acamprosate is now prescribed more commonly than
disulfiram in outpatient settings, but disulfiram is prescribed more often in
inpatient settings because it helps facilitate initial abstinence.
Other drugs that are useful in reducing alcohol consumption include
naltrexone (ReVia, Trexan), nalmefene (Revex), topiramate (Topamax), and
gabapentin (Neurontin). These agents are discussed in their respective
sections.
Disulfiram
Pharmacologic Actions. Disulfiram is almost completely absorbed from
the GI tract after oral administration. Its half-life is estimated to be 60 to 120
hours. Therefore, it may take 1 or 2 weeks to eliminate disulfiram from the
body after taking the last dose.
The metabolism of ethanol proceeds through oxidation via alcohol
dehydrogenase to the formation of acetaldehyde, which is further metabolized
to acetyl-coenzyme A (acetyl-CoA) by aldehyde dehydrogenase. Disulfiram
is an aldehyde dehydrogenase inhibitor that interferes with the metabolism of
alcohol by producing a marked increase in blood acetaldehyde concentration.
The accumulation of acetaldehyde (to a level up to 10 times higher than
occurs in the normal metabolism of alcohol) produces a wide array of
unpleasant reactions, called the disulfiram–alcohol reaction, characterized by
nausea, throbbing headache, vomiting, hypertension, flushing, sweating,
thirst, dyspnea, tachycardia, chest pain, vertigo, and blurred vision. The
reaction occurs almost immediately after the ingestion of one alcoholic drink
and may last from 30 minutes to 2 hours.
BLOOD CONCENTRATIONS IN RELATION TO ACTION. Plasma concentrations of

disulfiram vary among individuals because of several factors, most notably
age and hepatic function. In general, the severity of disulfiram–alcohol
reaction is proportional to the amount of the ingested disulfiram and alcohol.
Nevertheless, disulfiram plasma levels are rarely obtained in clinical practice.
The positive correlation between plasma concentrations of alcohol and the




<<<PAGE 2188>>>

Acamprosate
Pharmacologic Actions. Acamprosate’s mechanism of action is not fully
understood, but it is thought to antagonize neuronal overactivity related to the
actions of the excitatory neurotransmitter glutamate. In part, this may result
from antagonism of NMDA receptors.
Indications. Acamprosate is used for treating alcohol-dependent individuals
seeking to continue to remain alcohol-free after they have stopped drinking.
Its efficacy in promoting abstinence has not been demonstrated in persons
who have not undergone detoxification and who have not achieved alcohol
abstinence before beginning treatment.
Precautions and Adverse Effects. Side effects are mostly seen early in
treatment and are usually mild and transient. The most common side effects
are headache, diarrhea, flatulence, abdominal pain, paresthesias, and various
skin reactions. No adverse events occur after abrupt withdrawal of
acamprosate, even after long-term use. There is no evidence of addiction to
the drug. Patients with severe renal impairment (creatinine clearance of less
than 30 mL/min) should not be given acamprosate.
Drug Interactions. Alcohol and acamprosate do not affect each other’s
pharmacokinetics. The same is true when adding disulfiram or diazepam to
acamprosate. Coadministration of naltrexone with acamprosate produces an
increase in concentrations of acamprosate. No adjustment of dosage is
recommended in such patients. The pharmacokinetics of naltrexone and its
major metabolite 6-β-naltrexol were unaffected after coadministration with
acamprosate. During clinical trials, patients taking acamprosate
concomitantly with antidepressants more commonly reported both weight
gain and weight loss compared with patients taking either medication alone.
Laboratory Interferences. Acamprosate has not been shown to interfere
with commonly performed laboratory tests.
Dosage and Clinical Guidelines. It is important to remember that
acamprosate should not be used to treat alcohol withdrawal symptoms. It
should only be started after the individual has been successfully weaned off




<<<PAGE 2189>>>

alcohol. Patients should show a commitment to remaining abstinent, and
treatment should be part of a comprehensive management program that
includes counseling or support group attendance.
Each tablet contains acamprosate calcium 333 mg, which is equivalent to
300 mg of acamprosate. The dose of acamprosate is different for different
patients. The recommended dosage is two 333-mg tablets (each dose should
total 666 mg) taken three times daily. Although dosing may be done without
regard to meals, dosing with meals was used during clinical trials and is
suggested as an aid to compliance in patients who regularly eat three meals
daily. A lower dose may be useful in some patients. A missed dose should be
taken as soon as possible. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, the
missed dose should be skipped, and then the regular dosing schedule should
be resumed. Doses should not be doubled up. For patients with moderate
renal impairment (creatinine clearance of 30 to 50 mL/min), a starting dosage
of one 333-mg tablet taken three times daily is recommended. People with
severe renal insufficiency should not take acamprosate.

CLONIDINE AND GUANFACINE
Clonidine and guanfacine are marketed as hypertension treatments.
Guanfacine is more selective and less potent than clonidine, but clonidine is
the most widely used α2-agonist.
Pharmacologic Actions
Clonidine and guanfacine are presynaptic α2-receptor agonists. They inhibit
sympathetic outflow and cause vasodilation of blood vessels. Clonidine and
guanfacine are well absorbed from the GI tract and reach peak plasma levels
1 to 3 hours after oral administration. The half-life of clonidine is 6 to 20
hours, and that of guanfacine is 10 to 30 hours.
The agonist effects of clonidine and guanfacine on presynaptic α2adrenergic receptors in the sympathetic nuclei of the brain result in a decrease
in the amount of norepinephrine released from the presynaptic nerve
terminals. This decrease serves to reset the body’s sympathetic tone at a
lower level and decrease arousal. Table 21-54 provides a summary of α2adrenergic receptor agonists used in psychiatry.




<<<PAGE 2284>>>

Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:3004.
Hser YI, Hoffman V, Grella CE, Anglin MD. A 33-year follow-up of
narcotics addicts. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2001;58:503–508.
Ivanov I. Disulfiram and acamprosate. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P,
eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed.
Vol. 2. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:3099.
Johnson BA. Update on neuropharmacological treatments for alcoholism:
scientific basis and clinical findings. Biochem Pharmacol. 2008;75(1):34.
Johnson BA, Ait-Daoud N, Prihoda TJ. Combining ondansetron and
naltrexone effectively treats biologically predisposed alcoholics: from
hypotheses to preliminary clinical evidence. Alcoholism Clin Exp Res.
2000;24(5):737–742.
Karachalios GN, Charalabopoulos A, Papalimneou V, Kiortsis D, Dimicco P.
Withdrawal syndrome following cessation of antihypertensive drug
therapy. Int J Clin Pract. 2005;5:562.
King A, De Wit H, Riley RC, Cao D, Niaura R. Efficacy of naltrexone in
smoking cessation: a preliminary study and an examination of sex
differences. Nicotine Tobacco Res. 2006;8(5):671–682.
Kleber HD. Methadone maintenance 4 decades later: thousands of lives saved
but still controversial. JAMA. 2008;300:2303.
Kornfield R, Watson S, Higashi AS, Conti RM, Dusetzina SB, Garfield CF,
Dorsey ER, Huskamp HA, Alexander GC. Effects of FDA advisories on
the pharmacologic treatment of ADHD, 2004–2008. Psychiatr Serv.
2013;64(4):339–346.
Krishnan-Sarin S, Rounsaville BJ, O’Malley SS. Opioid receptor antagonists:
naltrexone and nalmefene. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan
& Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Vol. 2.
Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:3171.
Krystal JH, Cramer JA, Kroll WF, Kirk GF, Rosenheck RA. Naltrexone in
the treatment of alcohol dependence. N Engl J Med. 2001;345(24):1734.
Laaksonen E, Koski-Jännes A, Salaspuro M, Ahtínen H, Alho H. A
randomized, multicentre, open-label, comparative trial of disulfiram,
naltrexone and acamprosate in the treatment of alcohol dependence.
Alcohol. 2008;43(1):53–61.
Likar R, Kayser H, Sittl R. Long-term management of chronic pain with
transdermal buprenorphine: a multicenter, open-label, follow-up study in




<<<PAGE 2285>>>

patients from three short-term clinical trials. Clin Ther. 2006;28(6):943–
952.
Mann K, Kiefer F, Spanagel R, Littleton J. Acamprosate: recent findings and
future research directions. Alcohol Clin Exp Res. 2008;32(7):1105–1110.
Marsch LA, Bickel WK, Badger GJ, Stothart ME, Quesnel KJ. Comparison
on pharmacological treatments for opioid-dependent adolescents: a
randomized controlled trial. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2005;62:1157.
Mattick RP, Kimber J. Breen C, Davoli M. Buprenorphine maintenance
versus placebo or methadone maintenance for opioid dependence.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2008:CD002207.
Ming X, Gordon E, Kang N, Wagner GC. Use of clonidine in children with
autism spectrum disorders. Brain Dev. 2008;30(7):454–760.
Monterosso JR, Flannery BA, Pettinati HM, Oslin DW, Rukstalis M.
Predicting treatment response to naltrexone: the influence of craving and
family history. Am J Addict. 2001;10(3):258–268.
Myers SM. The status of pharmacotherapy for autism spectrum disorders.
Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2007;8(11):1579.
Neumann AM, Blondell RD, Jaanimagi U, Giambrone AK, Homish GG,
Lozano JR, Kowalik U, Azadfard M. A preliminary study comparing
methadone and buprenorphine in patients with chronic pain and coexistent
opioid addiction. J Addict Dis. 2013;32(1):68–78.
Niederhofer H, Staffen W. Naltrexone and disulfiram in patients with alcohol
dependence and comorbid psychiatric disorders. Biol Psychiatry.
2005;57(10):1128.
Oliva EM, Trafton JA, Harris AH, Gordon AJ. Trends in opioid agonist
therapy in the Veterans Health Administration: is supply keeping up with
demand? Am J Drug Alcohol Abuse. 2013;39(2):103–107.
O’Malley SS, Cooney JL, Krishnan-Sarin S, Dubin J, McKee SA. A
controlled trial of naltrexone augmentation of nicotine replacement for
smoking cessation. Arch Intern Med. 2006;166:667.
Raymond NC, Grant JE, Kim SW, Coleman E. Treatment of compulsive
sexual behavior with naltrexone and serotonin reuptake inhibitors: two
case studies. Int Clin Psychopharmacol. 2002;17(4):201.
Ritvo JI, Park C. The psychiatric management of patients with alcohol
dependence. Curr Treat Options Neurol. 2007;9(5):381.
Sallee F, Connor DF, Newcorn JH. A review of the rationale and clinical




<<<PAGE 3036>>>

NMDA receptor function. The GABA receptor effects may be associated
with the anxiolytic effects of ethanol. Persistent abuse and dependency on
ethanol result in a downregulation of GABAA receptors and an upregulation
of NMDA receptors such that acute discontinuation of ethanol results in a
hyperexcitable state characterized by delirium tremens. Furthermore,
supersensitive NMDA receptors in the context of thiamine deficiency may
contribute to the excitotoxic neuron degeneration of Wernicke–Korsakoff
syndrome.
Acamprosate is a derivative of homotaurine that was developed as an agent
to reduce alcohol consumption, craving, and relapse in alcoholic patients, for
which it exhibits moderate efficacy in clinical trials. Because taurine
resembles GABA, it was thought that acamprosate acted via GABAA
receptors, but electrophysiologic studies found little evidence to support this
hypothesis. Subsequent studies demonstrated that it inhibited NMDA
receptor responses in cortical slices and recombinant NMDA receptors. The
precise mechanism whereby acamprosate alters NMDA receptor function,
however, remains unclear.
Fetal alcohol syndrome is the most common preventable cause of mental
retardation. Convincing evidence has been developed that the
microencephaly associated with fetal alcohol exposure results from inhibition
of NMDA receptor function, resulting in widespread neuronal apoptosis in
the immature cortex. NMDA receptor activation is essential for immature
neuronal survival and differentiation.
Neuropeptides
Neuropeptides represent the most diverse class of signaling molecules in the
CNS. Initially discovered for their role in the hypothalamic regulation of
pituitary hormone secretion, the complex role of peptides in brain function
has emerged over the last 30 years. Many neuropeptides and their receptors
are widely distributed within the CNS, where they have an extraordinary
array of direct or neuromodulatory effects, ranging from modulating
neurotransmitter release and neuronal firing patterns to the regulation of
emotionality and complex behaviors. More than 100 unique biologically
active neuropeptides have been identified in the brain, a subset of which is
presented in Table 33-3. Adding to the complexity of neuropeptide systems




<<<PAGE 3588>>>

Index
Page numbers followed by f indicate figures, page numbers followed by t
indicated tables, and page numbers in boldface indicate main discussions.
AA. See Alcoholics Anonymous (AA)
AACAP. See American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry
(AACAP)
AAIDD. See American Association on Intellectual and Developmental
Disability (AAIDD)
Abdominal breathing, for insomnia, 512, 512t
Aberrant Behavior Checklist (ABC), 85
Abilify. See Aripiprazole
Abnormal Involuntary Movement Scale (AIMS), 11, 347, 597t
Abraham, Karl, 799, 1078
Absence seizure, 250, 251f
Abstinence, 296, 329
Abstract reasoning, assessment of, in MSE, 11, 11t
Acalculia, 48, 145. See also Mathematics deficits
Acamprosate, 694
in alcohol use disorder treatment, 283, 284t
ACC. See Anterior cingulate cortex (ACC)
Acculturation problem, 586
Acculturative stress, 1048–1049
Acetaminophen toxicity, 63
Acetylcholine, 227
Acetyl coenzyme A (ACoA), 958
Acetylcysteine (Mucomyst), 63
Achenbach Child Behavior Checklist, 77, 78
Ackerman, Nathan, 764


