<<<PAGE 416>>>

receptor antagonist, has been investigated without much success, based on
the notion that blocking endogenous opioids would reduce autistic symptoms.
Tetrahydrobiopterin, a coenzyme that enhances the action of enzymes, was
studied. However, the results were not significant. Post hoc analysis of the
three core symptoms of autism—social interaction, communication, and
stereotyped behaviors—revealed a significant improvement in social
interaction score after 6 months of active treatment. There was a positive
correlation between social response and IQ. These results suggest that there is
a possible effect of tetrahydrobiopterin on the social functioning of children
with autism.
A case report suggested that low-dose venlafaxine was efficacious in three
adolescents and young adults with autistic disorder with self-injurious
behavior and hyperactivity. The dose of venlafaxine used was 18.75 mg/day,
and the efficacy continued over 6 months.
Complementary and Alternative Medicine (CAM) Approaches to
Autism Spectrum Disorder
Complementary and alternative medicine (CAM) is a group of nontraditional
treatments used in conjunction with conventional treatments. Safe
interventions that target both core and associated behavioral features of
autism spectrum disorder with unknown efficacy include the following:
music therapy, to promote communication and expression, and yoga, to
promote attention and decrease activity level. A biologically based practice
that appears to be safe and efficacious is melatonin, which reduces sleeponset latency in children. Other biologic practices that appear to be safe but
with unknown efficacy include vitamin C, multivitamins, essential fatty
acids, and the amino acids carnosine and carnitine. Secretin is ineffective in
RCTs in the treatment of autism spectrum disorder.

EPIDEMIOLOGY
Prevalence
The diagnostic rate for autism spectrum disorders has increased over the last
two decades, and currently 1 in 54 children is diagnosed with autism
spectrum disorder in the United States. Autistic disorder, based on DSM-IV-




<<<PAGE 441>>>

help treat adults with ADHD. Only one randomized, double-blind, placebocontrolled study of the efficacy and safety of modafinil film-coated tablets in
approximately 250 adolescents with ADHD showed that 48 percent of those
on active treatment were rated as “much” or “very much” improved
compared with 17 percent of patients receiving placebo. The dosage range
was from 170 to 425 mg administered once daily, titrated to optimal doses
based on efficacy and tolerability. Modafinil failed to receive FDA approval
based on a Stevens–Johnson skin rash that occurred in a patient during the
trial. The most common side effects included insomnia, headache, and
decreased appetite.
Some clinicians use venlafaxine, especially for children and adolescents,
with combinations of ADHD and depression or anxiety features. No clear
empirical evidence supports the use of venlafaxine in the treatment of
ADHD.
One open-label report of reboxetine, a selective norepinephrine reuptake
inhibitor that is not available in the US, in 31 children and adolescents with
ADHD who were resistant to methylphenidate treatment, suggested that this
agent may have efficacy. In this open trial, reboxetine was initiated and
maintained at 4 mg/day. The most common side effects included drowsiness,
sedation, and gastrointestinal symptoms. Reboxetine and other new agents in
this class await controlled studies.
Monitoring Pharmacologic Treatment
STIMULANTS. Stimulant medications have adrenergic effects and cause
moderate increases in blood pressure and pulse rate. At baseline, the most
recent American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry (AACAP)
practice parameters recommend the following workup before starting the use
of stimulant medications: physical examination, blood pressure, pulse,
weight, and height. Screening electrocardiograms are recommended prior to
initiating stimulant medications, particularly if there is a family history or risk
factors for cardiac disease.
Children and adolescents using stimulants should have their height, weight,
blood pressure, and pulse checked quarterly and have a physical examination
annually. Monitoring starts with the initiation of medication. Because school
performance is most markedly affected, we should give individual attention




<<<PAGE 1201>>>

skin rash. Evidence for valproate and other anticonvulsants is limited.
Gabapentin and levetiracetam appear to be ineffective.
Antipsychotics. Several of the atypical antipsychotics have shown efficacy
for bipolar depression. Quetiapine has the best evidence. It appears that
quetiapine, in a modest dose (300 mg/day), is sufficient to improve
symptoms. Olanzapine, lurasidone, and cariprazine also have positive studies,
and the FDA approved lurasidone for this indication. Ziprasidone and
aripiprazole do not appear to be effective.
Antidepressants. It remains controversial whether antidepressants are useful
for the depressive phase of bipolar disorder. This is particularly true in
patients with rapid cycling and mixed states. They seem to be less effective
than for major depressive disorder and may induce cycling, mania, or
hypomania. The risk of inducing mania seems highest for tricyclic
antidepressants, monoamine oxidase inhibitors, and perhaps the serotonin
norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors such as venlafaxine. Most experts agree
that antidepressants are not appropriate as monotherapy for patients with
bipolar disorder.
Whether we can use them as adjuncts is also controversial. Some
antidepressants have some evidence of efficacy for adjunctive therapy, such
as fluoxetine. On the whole, the available evidence suggests they may have
some usefulness when combined with a mood stabilizer.




<<<PAGE 1248>>>

headaches,
somnolence,
agitation,
insomnia,
sweating, tremor,
anorexia,
dizziness,
constipation
Paroxetine

20–60

Nausea, diarrhea,
dry mouth,
headaches,
somnolence,
insomnia,
sweating,
asthenia, male
sexual
dysfunction,
dizziness

None

Sertraline

50–200

Nausea, diarrhea,
dry mouth,
headaches,
somnolence,
insomnia,
fatigue, tremor,
male sexual
dysfunction,
dizziness

None

75–375

Headaches,
Nausea
somnolence, dry
mouth,
dizziness,
nervousness,
insomnia,

SNRI
Venlafaxine




<<<PAGE 1359>>>

model that includes training in decision making and categorizing; exposure
and habituation to discarding; and cognitive restructuring. Treatment includes
both office and in-home sessions. The role of the therapist in this model is to
assist in the development of decision-making skills, to provide feedback
about normal saving behavior, and to identify and challenge the patient’s
erroneous beliefs about possessions. The goal in treatment is to get rid of a
significant amount of possessions and make the living space livable. Also,
treatment can provide the patients with the skills to maintain a positive
balance between the number of possessions and livable space.
Evidence for pharmacologic treatment relies on limited and uncontrolled
data that support the use of SSRIs or venlafaxine.
Hair-Pulling Disorder
Early data indicated that hair-pulling disorder, like OCD and BDD,
responded more robustly to clomipramine than to desipramine.
Unfortunately, subsequent trials of SSRIs and venlafaxine in hair-pulling
disorder have not consistently demonstrated efficacy. The most significant
positive clinical trial to date is with NAC (1200 to 2400 mg/day), a
nutraceutical that acts on the glutamatergic system. However, a trial of NAC
in pediatric hair-pulling disorder was negative. There are small controlled
trials indicating that dopamine receptor blockers may also be useful in these
conditions. Given their favorable side-effect profile, it may be reasonable to
use NAC as a first-line agent in adults with hair-pulling disorder, to use
SSRIs when patients have comorbid conditions for which these agents are
efficacious, and to consider low-dose dopamine receptor blockers in more
treatment-refractory cases.
Habit reversal training (HRT) is a set of cognitive-behavioral techniques
that have been shown efficacious in the treatment of childhood and adult
hair-pulling disorder. Components of HRT include awareness training,
competing for response training, and social support. Also, therapists use
stimulus control (SC) to change the patient’s environment so that hairpulling
is more effortful or less reinforcing. Controlled trials of augmentation of
HRT/SC with acceptance and commitment therapy, dialectical behavior
therapy, or cognitive therapy, have also suggested efficacy in hair-pulling
disorder.




<<<PAGE 1601>>>

the diagnostic approaches to RLS.
Table 15-15
Medications and Drugs Causing or Worsening Certain
Parasomnias
REM Sleep Behavior Disorder
Biperiden
Caffeine
Monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs)
Selegiline
Serotonin agonists
Tricyclic antidepressants
Venlafaxine
Withdrawal syndromes
Alcohol
Meprobamate
Pentazocine
Nitrazepam
Nightmares
Alcohol abuse or withdrawal
Drug-induced REM sleep rebound (e.g., withdrawal from REMsuppressing drugs such as methamphetamine)
l-DOPA
β-Blockers
A variety of medical conditions can cause secondary RLS, and we list
these in Table 15-17. A detailed history and physical examination are
essential parts of the RLS workup. Also, we should check a ferritin level in
every patient with symptoms consistent with RLS.
Periodic Limb Movement Disorder. Periodic limb movement disorder
(PLMD), previously called nocturnal myoclonus, involves brief, stereotypic,
repetitive, nonepileptiform movements of the limbs, usually the legs. It




<<<PAGE 1880>>>

Thus, blockade of serotonin reuptake by SSRIs can cause nausea and sexual
dysfunction. The D2 blockade of drugs used to treat psychosis can cause
extrapyramidal side effects. Agonist action of benzodiazepine receptors can
cause ataxia and daytime sleepiness. In these cases, additional medications
are frequently used to make the primary agent better tolerated.
Time Course
Adverse effects differ in terms of their onset and duration. Some side effects
appear at the outset of treatment and then rapidly diminish. Nausea occurring
with SSRIs or venlafaxine (Effexor) and sedation occurring with mirtazapine
(Remeron) are good examples of early, time-limited side effects. Early-onset,
but persistent, side effects include a dry mouth that is associated with
noradrenergic reuptake inhibition or antimuscarinic activity. Some side
effects appear later in treatment (late-appearing side effects) and, sometimes
may be just the opposite of adverse events early in treatment. For example,
patients may typically lose weight during early treatment with SSRIs, only to
find, over time, a reversal occurs, so that they gain weight.
Similarly, early activation or agitation may be followed by constant fatigue
or apathy. Because most data about new drugs come from short-term studies,
generally 8 weeks in duration, early-onset side effects are overrepresented in
product information and descriptions of newly marketed information.
Clinicians must follow the letters to the editor sections of journals and other
sources of information to update their understanding of the real side effect
profile of a drug.
Adverse effects differ in their impact on compliance and the potential to
cause harm. Depending on a patient’s threshold of tolerance for a side effect
and the impact on the quality of life, side effects can lead to drug
discontinuation. Examples of serious side effects include agranulocytosis
(clozapine), Stevens–Johnson syndrome (lamotrigine [Lamictal]), hepatic
failure (nefazodone [Serzone]), stroke (phenelzine [Nardil]), and heart block
(thioridazine [Mellaril]). Overall, the risk of life-threatening side effects with
psychotropics is low. Drugs that carry such a risk should be monitored more
closely, and the prescribing physician should take into account whether the
potential clinical benefits justify the additional risk. Any drug with a serious
risk, as reflected in a black box warning, is generally used less extensively




<<<PAGE 1998>>>

muscle tension following abrupt discontinuation of vortioxetine 15 or 20
mg/day. It is recommended that the dose be decreased to 10 mg/day for 1
week before full discontinuation of vortioxetine 15 or 20 mg/day.
Vortioxetine is available in 5-, 10-, 15-, and 20-mg tablets.

SELECTIVE SEROTONIN–NOREPINEPHRINE REUPTAKE
INHIBITORS
There are currently four SNRIs approved for use in the United States:
venlafaxine (Effexor and Effexor XR), desvenlafaxine succinate (DVS;
Pristiq), duloxetine (Cymbalta), and levomilnacipran (Fetzima). A fifth
SNRI, milnacipran (Savella), available in other countries as an
antidepressant, has U.S. FDA approval in the United States as a treatment for
fibromyalgia. The term SNRI reflects the belief that the therapeutic effects of
these medications are mediated by concomitant blockade of neuronal
serotonin (5-HT) and norepinephrine uptake transporters. The SNRIs are also
sometimes referred to as dual reuptake inhibitors, a broader functional class
of antidepressant medications that include TCAs such as clomipramine
(Anafranil) and, to a lesser extent, imipramine (Tofranil) and amitriptyline
(Elavil). What distinguishes the SNRIs from TCAs is their relative lack of
affinity for other receptors, especially muscarinic, histaminergic, and the
families of α- and β-adrenergic receptors. This distinction is an important one
because the SNRIs have a more favorable tolerability profile than the older
dual reuptake inhibitors.
Venlafaxine and Desvenlafaxine
Therapeutic Indications. Venlafaxine is approved for the treatment of
four disorders: MDD, GAD, social anxiety disorder, and panic disorder.
MDD is currently the only FDA-approved indication for DVS.
DEPRESSION. The FDA does not recognize any class of antidepressants as

being more effective than any other. This does not mean that differences do
not exist, but no study to date has sufficiently demonstrated such superiority.
It has been argued that direct modulation of serotonin and norepinephrine
may convey more significant antidepressant effects than are exerted by




<<<PAGE 1999>>>

medications that selectively enhance only noradrenergic or serotoninergic
neurotransmission. This more significant therapeutic benefit could result
from an acceleration of postsynaptic adaptation to increased neuronal
signaling, simultaneous activation of two pathways for intracellular signal
transduction, additive effects on the activity of relevant genes such as brainderived neurotrophic factor, or, quite simply, broader coverage of depressive
symptoms. Clinical evidence supporting this hypothesis first emerged in a
pair of studies conducted by the Danish University Antidepressant Group,
which found an advantage for the dual reuptake inhibitor clomipramine
compared with SSRIs citalopram (Celexa) and paroxetine (Paxil). Another
report, which compared the results of a group of patients prospectively
treated with the combination of desipramine (Norpramin) and fluoxetine
(Prozac) with a historical comparison group treated with desipramine alone,
provided additional support. A meta-analysis of 25 inpatient studies
comparing the efficacy of TCAs and SSRIs yielded the most substantial
evidence. Specifically, although the TCAs were found to have a modest
overall advantage, superiority versus SSRIs was almost entirely explained by
the studies that used the TCAs that are considered to be dual reuptake
inhibitors—clomipramine, amitriptyline, and imipramine. Meta-analyses of
head-to-head studies suggest that venlafaxine has the potential to induce
higher rates of remission in depressed patients than do the SSRIs. This
difference in the venlafaxine advantage is about 6 percent. DVS has not been
extensively compared with other classes of antidepressants concerning
efficacy.
The extended-release formulation of
venlafaxine is approved for the treatment of GAD. In clinical trials lasting 6
months, dosages of 75 to 225 mg a day were effective in treating insomnia,
poor concentration, restlessness, irritability, and excessive muscle tension
related to GAD.
GENERALIZED ANXIETY DISORDER.

SOCIAL ANXIETY DISORDER. The extended-release formulation of venlafaxine

is approved for the treatment of social anxiety disorder. Its efficacy was
established in 12-week studies.
OTHER INDICATIONS. Case reports and uncontrolled studies have indicated that




<<<PAGE 2000>>>

venlafaxine may be beneficial in the treatment of obsessive-compulsive
disorder, panic disorder, agoraphobia, social phobia, ADHD, and patients
with a dual diagnosis of depression and cocaine dependence. It has also been
used in chronic pain syndromes with good effect.
Precautions and Adverse Reactions. Venlafaxine has a safety and
tolerability profile similar to that of the more widely prescribed SSRI class.
Nausea is the most frequently reported treatment-emergent adverse effect
associated with venlafaxine and DVS therapy. Initiating therapy at lower
dosages may also attenuate nausea. When extremely problematic, treatmentinduced nausea can be controlled by prescribing a selective 5-HT3 antagonist
or mirtazapine (Remeron).
Venlafaxine and DVS therapy is associated with sexual side effects,
predominantly decreased libido and a delay to orgasm or ejaculation. The
incidence of these side effects may exceed 30 to 40 percent when there is a
direct, detailed assessment of sexual function.
Other common side effects include headache, insomnia, somnolence, dry
mouth, dizziness, constipation, asthenia, sweating, and nervousness.
Although several side effects are suggestive of anticholinergic effects, these
drugs have no affinity for muscarinic or nicotinic receptors. Thus,
noradrenergic agonism is likely to be the culprit.
Higher-dose venlafaxine therapy is associated with an increased risk of
sustained elevations of BP. Experience with the instant-release (IR)
formulation in studies of depressed patients indicated that sustained
hypertension was dose-related, increasing from 3 to 7 percent at doses of 100
to 300 mg/day and 13 percent at doses greater than 300 mg/day. In this
dataset, venlafaxine therapy did not adversely affect BP control of patients
taking antihypertensives and lowered the mean values of patients with
elevated BP readings before therapy. In controlled studies of the extendedrelease formulation, venlafaxine therapy resulted in only approximately 1
percent greater risk of high BP when compared with the placebo. Arbitrarily
capping the upper dose of venlafaxine used in these studies, thus,
significantly attenuated concerns about elevated BP. When higher doses of
the extended-release formulation are used, however, monitoring of BP is
recommended.
Venlafaxine and DVS are commonly associated with discontinuation




<<<PAGE 2001>>>

syndrome. This syndrome is characterized by the appearance of a
constellation of adverse effects during a rapid taper or abrupt cessation,
including dizziness, dry mouth, insomnia, nausea, nervousness, sweating,
anorexia, diarrhea, somnolence, and sensory disturbances. It is recommended
that, whenever possible, a slow taper schedule should be used when longerterm treatment must be stopped. On occasion, substituting a few doses of the
sustained-release formulation of fluoxetine may help to bridge this transition.
There were no overdose fatalities in premarketing trials of venlafaxine,
although electrocardiographic changes (e.g., prolongation of QT interval,
bundle branch block, QRS interval prolongation), tachycardia, bradycardia,
hypotension, hypertension, coma, serotonin syndrome, and seizures were
reported. Fatal overdoses have been documented subsequently, typically
involving venlafaxine ingestion in combination with other drugs, alcohol, or
both.
Information concerning the use of venlafaxine and DVS by pregnant and
nursing women is not available at this time. Venlafaxine and DVS are
excreted in breast milk. Clinicians should carefully weigh the risks and
benefits of venlafaxine use by pregnant and nursing women.
Drug Interactions. Venlafaxine is metabolized in the liver primarily by the
CYP2D6 isoenzyme. Because the parent drug and principal metabolite are
essentially equipotent, medications that inhibit this isoenzyme usually do not
adversely affect therapy. Venlafaxine is itself a relatively weak inhibitor of
CYP2D6, although it can increase levels of substrates, such as desipramine or
risperidone (Risperdal). In vitro and in vivo studies have shown venlafaxine
to cause little or no inhibition of CYP1A2, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, and
CYP3A4.
Venlafaxine is contraindicated in patients taking MAOIs because of the
risk of a pharmacodynamic interaction (i.e., serotonin syndrome). An MAOI
should not be started for at least 7 days after stopping venlafaxine. Few data
are available regarding the combination of venlafaxine with atypical
neuroleptics, benzodiazepines, lithium (Eskalith), and anticonvulsants;
therefore, clinical judgment should be exercised when combining
medications.
Laboratory Interferences. Data are not currently available on laboratory




<<<PAGE 2002>>>

interferences with venlafaxine. There have been some reports of patients
taking venlafaxine who have false-positive results on liquid chromatography
testing for tramadol.
Dosage and Administration. Venlafaxine is available in 25-, 37.5-, 50-,
75-, and 100-mg tablets and 37.5-, 75-, and 150-mg extended-release
capsules. The tablets and the extended-release capsules are equally potent,
and persons stabilized with one can switch to an equivalent dosage of the
other. Because the immediate-release tablets are rarely used due to their
tendency to cause nausea and the need for multiple-daily doses, the dosage
recommendations that follow refer to the use of the extended-release
capsules.
In depressed persons, venlafaxine demonstrates a dose–response curve.
The initial therapeutic dosage is 75 mg a day, given once a day. However,
most persons are started at a dosage of 37.5 mg for 4 to 7 days to minimize
adverse effects, particularly nausea. A convenient starter kit for the drug
contains a 1-week supply of both the 37.5- and 75-mg strengths. If a rapid
titration is preferred, the dosage can be raised to 150 mg/day after day 4. As a
rule, the dosage can be raised in increments of 75 mg a day every 4 or more
days. Although the recommended upper dosage of the extended-release
preparation (venlafaxine XR) is 225 mg/day, it is approved by the FDA for
use at dosages up to 375 mg a day. The dosage of venlafaxine should be
halved in persons with significantly diminished hepatic or renal function. If
discontinued, venlafaxine use should be gradually tapered over 2 to 4 weeks
to avoid withdrawal symptoms.
There are minor differences in the doses used for major depression, GAD,
and social anxiety disorder. In the treatment of these disorders, for example, a
dose–response effect has not been found. Also, lower mean dosages are
typically used, with most patients taking 75 to 150 mg/day.
DVS is available as 50- and 100-mg extended-release tablets. The
therapeutic dose for most patients is 50 mg a day. Although some patients
may need higher doses, in clinical trials, no more significant therapeutic
benefit was noted when the dose was increased. At higher doses, adverse
events and discontinuation rates were increased.
Duloxetine




<<<PAGE 2003>>>

Pharmacologic Actions. Duloxetine is formulated as a delayed-release
capsule to reduce the risk of severe nausea associated with the drug. It is well
absorbed, but there is a 2-hour delay before absorption begins. Peak plasma
concentrations occur 6 hours after ingestion. Food delays the time to achieve
maximum concentrations from 6 to 10 hours and reduces the extent of
absorption by about 10 percent. Duloxetine has an elimination half-life of
about 12 hours (range, 8 to 17 hours). Steady-state plasma concentrations
occur after 3 days. Duloxetine’s elimination is mainly through the isozymes
CYP2D6 and CYP1A2. Duloxetine undergoes extensive hepatic metabolism
to numerous metabolites. About 70 percent of the drug appears in the urine as
metabolites, and about 20 percent is excreted in the feces. Duloxetine is 90
percent protein-bound.
Therapeutic Indications
DEPRESSION. In contrast to venlafaxine, a small number of studies have
compared duloxetine with the SSRIs. Although these studies are suggestive
of some advantage in efficacy, their findings are limited by the use of fixed,
low starting doses of paroxetine and fluoxetine, but dosages of duloxetine in
some studies were as high as 120 mg/day. Any inferences on whether
duloxetine is superior to the SSRIs in any aspect of treatment for depression
thus await more evidence from adequately designed trials.
NEUROPATHIC PAIN

ASSOCIATED

WITH

DIABETES

AND

STRESS

URINARY

INCONTINENCE. Duloxetine is the first drug to be approved by the FDA as a

treatment for neuropathic pain associated with diabetes. Its pain effects have
not been compared with other agents, such as venlafaxine and the TCAs.
Duloxetine is currently awaiting approval as a treatment for stress urinary
incontinence, the inability to voluntarily control bladder voiding, which is the
most frequent type of incontinence in women. The action of duloxetine in the
treatment of stress urinary incontinence is associated with its effects in the
sacral spinal cord, which in turn increases the activity of the striated urethral
sphincter. Duloxetine is marketed under the name Yentreve for this indication
which has not been approved for this indication in the United States but is
available in the European Union and other countries.




<<<PAGE 2004>>>

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS. The most common adverse reactions

are nausea, dry mouth, dizziness, constipation, fatigue, decreased appetite,
anorexia, somnolence, and increased sweating. Nausea was the most common
side effect that led to treatment discontinuation in clinical trials. The true
incidence of sexual dysfunction is unknown; the long-term effects on body
weight are also unknown. In clinical trials, treatment with duloxetine was
associated with mean increases in BP averaging 2 mm Hg systolic and 0.5
mm Hg diastolic versus placebo. No studies have compared the BP effects of
venlafaxine and duloxetine at equivalent therapeutic doses.
Close monitoring is suggested when using duloxetine in patients who have
or are at risk for diabetes. Duloxetine has been shown to increase blood sugar
and hemoglobin A1C levels during long-term treatment.
Patients with substantial alcohol use should not be treated with duloxetine
because of possible hepatic effects. It also should not be prescribed for
patients with hepatic insufficiency and end-stage renal disease or patients
with uncontrolled narrow-angle glaucoma.
Abrupt discontinuation of duloxetine should be avoided because it may
produce a discontinuation syndrome similar to that of venlafaxine. A gradual
dose reduction is recommended.
Clinicians should avoid the use of duloxetine by pregnant and nursing
women unless the potential benefits justify the potential risks.
Drug Interactions. Duloxetine is a moderate inhibitor of CYP450
enzymes.
Laboratory Interferences. Data are not currently available on laboratory
interferences with duloxetine.
Dosage and Administration. Duloxetine is available in 20-, 30-, and 60mg tablets. The recommended therapeutic and maximum dosage is 60
mg/day. The 20- and 30-mg doses are useful for either initial therapy or for
twice-daily use as strategies to reduce side effects. In clinical trials, dosages
of up to 120 mg/day were studied, but no consistent advantage in efficacy
was noted at doses higher than 60 mg/day. Duloxetine thus does not appear to
demonstrate a dosage–response curve. However, there were difficulties in
tolerability with single doses above 60 mg. Accordingly, when dosages of 80




<<<PAGE 2005>>>

and 120 mg/day were used, they were administered as 40 or 60 mg twice
daily. It remains to be seen to what extent dosages above 60 mg/day will be
necessary and whether this will require divided doses to make the drug
tolerable.
Milnacipran and Levomilnacipran
Milnacipran is only FDA approved for the treatment of fibromyalgia.
Although some countries have approved milnacipran for general use as an
antidepressant, efficacy is not as well established. Compared with
venlafaxine, milnacipran is approximately five times more potent for
inhibition of norepinephrine uptake than for 5-HT reuptake inhibition.
Milnacipran has a half-life of approximately 8 hours and shows linear
pharmacokinetics between doses of 50 and 250 mg/day. Milnacipran has no
active metabolites, and it is directly metabolized in the liver. The kidneys
primarily excrete milnacipran.
Milnacipran is available as 12.5-, 25-, 50-, and 100-mg tablets. The
standard recommended milnacipran dose is as follows: day 1, 12.5 mg once
daily; days 2 and 3, 12.5 mg twice daily; days 4 to 7, 25 mg twice daily; and
day 7 and beyond, 50 mg twice daily.
Levomilnacipran was approved in 2013 by the FDA as a treatment for
MDD in adults. Levomilnacipran is an active enantiomer of the racemic drug
milnacipran. In vitro studies have shown that it has greater potency for
norepinephrine reuptake inhibition than for serotonin reuptake inhibition and
does not directly affect the uptake of dopamine or other neurotransmitters. It
is taken once daily as a sustained-release formulation. In clinical trials, doses
of 40, 80, or 120 mg improved symptoms compared with placebo.
The most common adverse reactions in the placebo-controlled trials were
nausea, constipation, hyperhidrosis, increased heart rate, erectile dysfunction,
tachycardia, vomiting, and palpitations. Rates of adverse events were
generally consistent across the 40- to 120-mg dose range. The only doserelated adverse events were urinary hesitation and erectile dysfunction.

BUPROPION
Bupropion (Wellbutrin, Wellbutrin SR, Wellbutrin XL) is an antidepressant
drug that inhibits the reuptake of norepinephrine and, possibly, dopamine.




<<<PAGE 2009>>>

presence of these waveforms in individuals taking a medication known to
lower the seizure threshold may be a risk factor for developing seizures.
Other risk factors for seizures include a history of seizures, use of alcohol,
recent benzodiazepine withdrawal, organic brain disease, head trauma, or
pretreatment epileptiform discharges on EEG.
The use of bupropion by pregnant women is not associated with a specific
risk of an increased rate of congenital disabilities. Bupropion is secreted in
breast milk, so the use of bupropion in nursing women should be based on the
clinical circumstances of the patient and the judgment of the clinician.
Few deaths have been reported after overdoses of bupropion. Poor
outcomes are associated with cases of massive doses and mixed-drug
overdoses. Seizures occur in about one-third of all overdoses and are dosedependent, with those having seizures ingesting a significantly higher median
dose. Fatalities can involve uncontrollable seizures, sinus bradycardia, and
cardiac arrest. Symptoms of poisoning most often involve seizures, sinus
tachycardia, hypertension, GI symptoms, hallucinations, and agitation. All
seizures are typically brief and self-limited. In general, however, bupropion is
safer in overdose cases than are other antidepressants except for perhaps
SSRIs.
Drug Interactions
Given the fact that bupropion is frequently combined with SSRIs or
venlafaxine, potential interactions are significant. Bupropion has been found
to affect the pharmacokinetics of venlafaxine. One study noted a significant
increase in venlafaxine levels and a consequent decrease in its main
metabolite O-desmethylvenlafaxine during combined treatment with
sustained-release bupropion. Bupropion hydroxylation is weakly inhibited by
venlafaxine. No significant changes in plasma levels of the SSRIs paroxetine
and fluoxetine have been reported. However, few case reports indicate that
the combination of bupropion and fluoxetine (Prozac) may be associated with
panic, delirium, or seizures. Bupropion, in combination with lithium
(Eskalith), may rarely cause CNS toxicity, including seizures.
Because of the possibility of inducing a hypertensive crisis, bupropion
should not be used concurrently with MAOIs. At least 14 days should pass
after the discontinuation of an MAOI before initiating treatment with




<<<PAGE 2124>>>

Interestingly, the antidepressant drug vilazodone (Viibryd) inhibits 5-HT
reuptake and acts as a 5-HT1A receptor partial agonist.
Pharmacologic Actions
Buspirone is well absorbed from the GI tract, but absorption is delayed by
food ingestion. Peak plasma levels are achieved 40 to 90 minutes after oral
administration. At doses of 10 to 40 mg, single-dose linear pharmacokinetics
are observed. Nonlinear pharmacokinetics are observed after multiple doses.
Because of its short half-life (2 to 11 hours), buspirone is dosed three times
daily. An active metabolite of buspirone, 1-pyrimidinylpiperazine (1-PP), is
about 20 percent less potent than buspirone but is up to 30 percent more
concentrated in the brain than the parent compound. The elimination half-life
of 1-PP is 6 hours.
Buspirone does not affect the GABA-associated chloride ion channel or
the serotonin reuptake transporter, targets of other drugs that are effective in
GAD. Buspirone also has activity at 5-HT2 and dopamine type 2 (D2)
receptors, although the significance of the effects at these receptors is
unknown. At D2 receptors, it has properties of both an agonist and an
antagonist.
Therapeutic Indications
Generalized Anxiety Disorder. Buspirone is a narrow-spectrum
antianxiety agent with demonstrated efficacy only in the treatment of GAD.
In contrast to the SSRIs or venlafaxine, buspirone is not effective in the
treatment of panic disorder, OCD, or social phobia. Buspirone, however, has
an advantage over these agents in that it does not typically cause sexual
dysfunction or weight gain.
Some evidence suggests that, compared with benzodiazepines, buspirone is
generally more useful for symptoms of anger and hostility, equally effective
for psychic symptoms of anxiety, and less effective for somatic symptoms of
anxiety. The full benefit of buspirone is evident only at dosages above 30 mg
a day. Compared with the benzodiazepines, buspirone has a delayed onset of
action and lacks any euphoric effect. Unlike benzodiazepines, buspirone has
no immediate effects, and patients should be told that a full clinical response




<<<PAGE 2154>>>

impulsivity, and inattentiveness and permit improved social interactions with
teachers, family, other adults, and peers. The success of long-term treatment
of ADHD with sympathomimetics, which are efficacious for most of the
various constellations of ADHD symptoms present from childhood to
adulthood, supports a model in which ADHD results from a genetically
determined neurochemical imbalance that requires lifelong pharmacologic
management.
Methylphenidate is the most commonly used initial agent at a dosage of 5
to 10 mg every 3 to 4 hours. Dosages may be increased to a maximum of 20
mg four times daily or 1 mg/kg a day. Use of the 20-mg sustained-release
formulation to achieve 6 hours of benefit and eliminate the need for dosing at
school is supported by many experts, although other authorities believe it is
less effective than the immediate-release formulation. Dextroamphetamine is
about twice as potent as methylphenidate on a per milligram basis and
provides 6 to 8 hours of benefit. Some 70 percent of nonresponders to one
sympathomimetic may benefit from another. All of the sympathomimetic
drugs should be tried before switching to drugs of a different class. The
previous dictum that sympathomimetics worsen tics and, therefore, should be
avoided by persons with comorbid ADHD and tic disorders has been
questioned. Small dosages of sympathomimetics do not appear to cause an
increase in the frequency and severity of tics. Alternatives to
sympathomimetics for ADHD include bupropion (Wellbutrin), venlafaxine
(Effexor), guanfacine (Tenex), clonidine (Catapres), and tricyclic drugs.
Further studies are needed to determine whether modafinil improves the
symptoms of ADHD.
Short-term use of sympathomimetics induces a euphoric feeling; however,
tolerance develops for both the euphoric feeling and the sympathomimetic
activity.
Narcolepsy and Hypersomnolence. Narcolepsy consists of sudden
sleep attacks (narcolepsy), sudden loss of postural tone (cataplexy), loss of
voluntary motor control going into (hypnagogic) or coming out of
(hypnopompic) sleep (sleep paralysis), and hypnagogic or hypnopompic
hallucinations. Sympathomimetics reduce narcoleptic sleep attacks and
improve wakefulness in other types of hypersomnolent states. Modafinil is
approved as an antisomnolence agent for the treatment of narcolepsy, for




<<<PAGE 2170>>>

maintenance. The buprenorphine mono (Subutex) should be used only for
pregnant patients (although recent studies are investigating whether the
combination of buprenorphine/naloxone is safe in pregnancy) or for patients
who have a documented anaphylactic reaction to naloxone.
Newer forms of buprenorphine delivery, including a transdermal skin
patch, a long-acting depot intramuscular injection that provides therapeutic
plasma levels for several weeks (Sublocade), and subcutaneous
buprenorphine implants that may provide therapeutic plasma levels for 6
months (Probuphine), are also FDA approved, although the latter treatment
requires special training to administer.
Tramadol. There are multiple reports of tramadol’s antidepressant effects,
both as monotherapy and augmentation agent in treatment-resistant
depression. Clinical and experimental data suggest that tramadol has an
inherent antidepressant-like activity. Tramadol has complex pharmacology. It
is a weak µ-opioid receptor agonist, a 5-HT releasing agent, a DA-releasing
agent, a 5-HT2C receptor antagonist, a norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor, an
NMDA receptor antagonist, a nicotinic acetylcholine receptor antagonist, a
TRPV1 receptor agonist, and an M1 and M3 muscarinic acetylcholine receptor
antagonist. Consistent with the evidence of its antidepressant effects is the
fact that tramadol has a close structural similarity to the antidepressant
venlafaxine.
Both venlafaxine and tramadol inhibit norepinephrine/serotonin reuptake
and inhibit the reserpine-induced syndrome completely. Both compounds
also have an analgesic effect on chronic pain. Venlafaxine may have an
opioid component, and naloxone reverses the antipain effect of venlafaxine.
Nonopioid activity is demonstrated by the fact that the µ-opioid receptor
antagonist naloxone does not fully antagonize its analgesic effect. Indicative
of their structural similarities, venlafaxine may cause false-positive results on
liquid chromatography tests to detect urinary tramadol levels.
Another relevant property of tramadol is its relatively long half-life, which
reduces the potential for misuse. Its habituating effects are found to be much
less than other opiate agonists, but abuse, withdrawal, and dependence are
risks. Tramadol requires metabolism to become analgesic: individuals who
are CYP2D6 “poor metabolizers” or use drugs that are CYP2D6 inhibitors




<<<PAGE 2260>>>

Kim SW, Shin IS, Kim JM, Park KH, Youn T, Yoon JS. Factors potentiating
the risk of mirtazapine-associated restless legs syndrome. Hum
Psychopharmocol. 2008;(7):615–620.
Kocsis JH, Leon AC, Markowitz JC, Manber R, Arnow B, Klein DN, Thase
ME. Patient preference as a moderator of outcome for chronic forms of
major depressive disorder treated with nefazodone, cognitive behavioral
analysis system of psychotherapy, or their combination. J Clin Psychiatry.
2009;70(3):354–361.
Koibuchi N. The role of thyroid hormone on functional organization in the
cerebellum. Cerebellum. 2013;12(3):304–306.
Kostrubsky SE, Strom SC, Kalgutkar AS, Kulkarni S, Atherton J. Inhibition
of hepatobiliary transport as a predictive method for clinical hepatotoxicity
of nefazodone. Toxicol Sci. 2006;90(2):451–459.
Lai MW, Klein-Schwartz W, Rodgers GC, Abrams JY, Haber DA. 2005
Annual report of the American Association of Poison Control Centers’
national poisoning and exposure database. Clin Toxicol. 2006;44:803–932.
Lam RW, Andersen HF, Wade AG. Escitalopram and duloxetine in the
treatment of major depressive disorder: a pooled analysis of two trials. Int
Clin Psychopharmacol. 2008;23(4):181.
Lapierre YD. A review of trimipramine: 30 years of clinical use. Drugs.
1989;38(Suppl 1):
17–24.
Lieberman DZ, Montgomery SA, Tourian KA, Brisard C, Rosas G. A pooled
analysis of two placebo-controlled trials of desvenlafaxine in major
depressive disorder. Int Clin Psychopharmacol. 2008;23:188–197.
Liebowitz MR, Manley AL, Padmanabhan SK, Ganguly R, Tummala R.
Efficacy, safety, and tolerability of desvenlafaxine 50 mg/day and 100
mg/day in outpatients with major depressive disorder. Curr Med Res Opin.
2008;24:1877–1890.
Liebowitz MR, Quitkin FM, Stewart JW. Antidepressant specificity in
atypical depression. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 1988;45:129–137.
Lojko D, Rybakowski JK. L-Thyroxine augmentation of serotonergic
antidepressants in female patients with refractory depression. J Affect
Disord. 2007;103(1–3):
253–256.
Looper KL. Potential medical and surgical complications of serotonergic


