<<<PAGE 963>>>

with the benzodiazepines. Table 4-24 lists the equivalent therapeutic doses of
benzodiazepines. Even when users take grossly excessive amounts (more
than 2 g) in suicide attempts, the symptoms include only drowsiness,
lethargy, ataxia, some confusion, and mild depression of the user’s vital
signs. The most lethal overdoses occur when the user takes a benzodiazepine
in combination with other sedatives, such as alcohol. In such cases, small
doses of benzodiazepines can cause death. The availability of flumazenil, a
specific benzodiazepine antagonist, has reduced the lethality of the
benzodiazepines. Flumazenil can be used in emergency departments to
reverse the effects of benzodiazepines.
Table 4-24
Approximate
Therapeutic
Benzodiazepines

Equivalent

Doses

Generic Name

Trade Name

Dose (mg)

Alprazolam

Xanax

1

Chlordiazepoxide

Librium

25

Clonazepam

Klonopin

0.5–1.0

Clorazepate

Tranxene

15

Diazepam

Valium

10

Estazolam

Prosom

1

Flurazepam

Dalmane

30

Lorazepam

Ativan

2

Oxazepam

Serax

30

Temazepam

Restoril

20

Triazolam

Halcion

0.25

Quazepam

Doral

15

Zolpidem

Ambien

10

of




<<<PAGE 1625>>>

Insomnia, however, usually returns upon discontinuation of dosing.
The clinical practice guideline from the American Academy of Sleep
Medicine recommends the use of suvorexant, eszopiclone, zaleplon,
zolpidem, triazolam, temazepam, ramelteon, and doxepin for the treatment of
insomnia (with specific agents having different indications for sleep-onset or
sleep-maintenance insomnia). They recommend against the use of trazodone,
tiagabine, diphenhydramine, melatonin, tryptophan, and valerian for
insomnia treatment.
Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy for Insomnia. Cognitive-behavioral
therapy for insomnia (CBTi), as a treatment modality, uses a combination of
behavioral and cognitive techniques to overcome dysfunctional sleep
behaviors, misperceptions, and distorted, disruptive thoughts about sleep.
Behavioral techniques include universal sleep hygiene, stimulus control
therapy, sleep restriction therapy, relaxation therapies, and biofeedback.
Studies repeatedly show significant, sustained improvement in sleep
symptoms, including number and duration of awakenings and sleep latency,
from CBTi. Short-term benefits are similar to that of medication, but CBTi
tends to have lasting benefits, even 36 months after treatment. With the
cessation of the medication, insomnia frequently returns and is sometimes
accompanied by rebound insomnia. CBTi has no apparent adverse effects.
There are no established “best practice” guidelines for length or quantity of
sessions. CBTi, however, is not without limitations. Most data do not
compare the efficacy of the individual components of CBTi. However, sleep
hygiene education alone produces an insignificant effect on sleep. Intuitively,
the multicomponent approach addresses many of the variables contributing to
insomnia. Other limitations of CBTi include lack of or unavailability of
trained specialists, cost of sessions, and noncoverage by insurance carriers.
The effects of CBTi take longer to emerge than the effects of medications.
Usually, when patients finally come for treatment of their insomnia, they are
desperate. It is challenging to convince them to try a therapy that may take
several weeks before it will provide relief. Furthermore, patients do not
assume a passive role in this type of therapy; they must be active participants.
Many individuals not only want a “quick fix,” but they also want to undergo
a procedure or have something administered rather than be involved in the
therapeutic process. For optimal CBTi, patients must commit to come to




<<<PAGE 1904>>>

prescriptions for small quantities, this practice passes along increased copay
costs to the patient. Many pharmacy benefit management programs
encourage the prescribing of a 3-month supply of medication.
Table 21-7
Sedative-Hypnotics Cited by the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration
Drug

Manufacturer

Zolpidem (Ambien/Ambien CR)

Sanofi Aventis

Butabarbital (Butisol Sodium)

MedPointe Pharmaceuticals

Pentobarbital and carbromal (Carbrital) Parke-Davis
Flurazepam (Dalmane)

Valeant Pharmaceuticals

Quazepam (Doral)

Questcor Pharmaceuticals

Triazolam (Halcion)

Pfizer

Eszopiclone (Lunesta)

Sepracor

Ethchlorvynol (Placidyl)

Abbott

Estazolam (Prosom)

Abbott

Temazepam (Restoril)

Tyco Healthcare

Ramelteon (Rozerem)

Takeda

Secobarbital (Seconal)

Lilly

Zaleplon (Sonata)

King Pharmaceuticals

In cases in which suicide is a significant concern, an attempt should be
made to verify that the medication is not being hoarded for a later overdose
attempt. Random pill counts or asking a family member to dispense daily
doses may be helpful. Some patients attempt suicide just as they are
beginning to recover. Large quantities of medications with a low therapeutic
index should be prescribed judiciously. Another reason to limit the number of




<<<PAGE 2115>>>

In contrast, lorazepam, which has a shorter elimination half-life than
diazepam but is less lipid-soluble, has a slower onset of action after a single
dose because the drug is absorbed and enters the brain more slowly.
However, the duration of action after a single dose is longer because it takes
longer for lorazepam to leave the brain and for brain levels to decrease below
the concentration that produces an effect. In chronic dosing, some of these
differences are not as apparent because brain levels are in equilibrium with
higher and more consistent steady-state blood levels, but additional doses still
produce a more rapid but briefer action with diazepam than with lorazepam.
Benzodiazepines are distributed widely in adipose tissue. As a result,
medications may persist in the body after discontinuation longer than would
be predicted from their elimination half-lives. Also, the dynamic half-life
(i.e., duration of action on the receptor) may be longer than the elimination
half-life.
The advantages of long–half-life drugs over short–half-life drugs include
less frequent dosing, less variation in plasma concentration, and less severe
withdrawal phenomena. The disadvantages include drug accumulation,
increased risk of daytime psychomotor impairment, and increased daytime
sedation.
The half-lives of lorazepam, oxazepam (Serax), temazepam (Restoril), and
estazolam are between 8 and 30 hours. Alprazolam has a half-life of 10 to 15
hours, and triazolam has the shortest half-life (2 to 3 hours) of all the orally
administered benzodiazepines. Rebound insomnia and anterograde amnesia
are thought to be more of a problem with the short–half-life drugs than with
the long–half-life drugs.
Because the administration of medications more frequently than the
elimination half-life leads to drug accumulation, medications such as
diazepam and flurazepam accumulate with daily dosing, eventually resulting
in increased daytime sedation.
Some benzodiazepines (e.g., oxazepam) are conjugated directly by
glucuronidation and are excreted. Most benzodiazepines are oxidized first by
CYP3A4 and CYP2C19, often to active metabolites. These metabolites may
then be hydroxylated to another active metabolite. For example, diazepam is
oxidized to desmethyldiazepam, which, in turn, is hydroxylated to produce
oxazepam. These products undergo glucuronidation to inactive metabolites.
Several benzodiazepines (e.g., diazepam, chlordiazepoxide) have the same




<<<PAGE 2116>>>

active metabolite (desmethyldiazepam), which has an elimination half-life of
more than 120 hours. Flurazepam (Dalmane), a lipid-soluble benzodiazepine
used as a hypnotic that has a short elimination half-life, has an active
metabolite (desalkylflurazepam) with a half-life greater than 100 hours. This
is another reason that the duration of action of a benzodiazepine may not
correspond to the half-life of the parent drug.
Therapeutic Indications
Insomnia. Because insomnia may be a symptom of a physical or psychiatric
disorder, hypnotics should not be used for more than 7 to 10 consecutive days
without a thorough investigation of the cause of insomnia. However, many
patients have long-standing sleep difficulties and benefit significantly from
the long-term use of hypnotic agents. Temazepam, flurazepam, and triazolam
are benzodiazepines with a sole indication for insomnia.
Flurazepam, temazepam, quazepam, estazolam, and triazolam are the
benzodiazepines approved for use as hypnotics. The benzodiazepine
hypnotics differ principally in their half-lives; flurazepam has the most
prolonged half-life, and triazolam has the shortest. Flurazepam may be
associated with minor cognitive impairment on the day after its
administration, and triazolam may be associated with mild rebound anxiety
and anterograde amnesia. Quazepam may be associated with daytime
impairment when used for a long time. Temazepam or estazolam may be a
reasonable compromise for most adults. Estazolam produces rapid onset of
sleep and a hypnotic effect for 6 to 8 hours.
Anxiety Disorders
GENERALIZED ANXIETY DISORDER. Benzodiazepines are highly effective for the

relief of anxiety associated with GAD. Most persons should be treated for a
predetermined, specific, and relatively brief period. However, because GAD
is a chronic disorder with a high rate of recurrence, some persons with GAD
may warrant long-term maintenance treatment with benzodiazepines.
Alprazolam and clonazepam, both high-potency
benzodiazepines, are commonly used medications for panic disorder with or
without agoraphobia. Although the SSRIs are also indicated for the treatment
PANIC

DISORDER.




<<<PAGE 2142>>>

when used for conscious sedation, but it has a potential for acute adverse
effects, including respiratory depression, apnea, and bradyarrhythmias, and
the prolonged infusion can cause acidosis and mitochondrial myopathies. The
carrier used for the infusion is a soybean emulsion that can be a culture
medium for various organisms. Also, the carrier can impair macrophage
function and cause hematologic and lipid abnormalities and anaphylactic
reactions.
Etomidate. Etomidate is a carboxylated imidazole that acts at the β2 and β3
subunits of the GABAA receptor. It has a rapid onset (1 minute) and short
duration (less than 5 minutes) of action. The propylene glycol vehicle has
been linked to hyperosmolar metabolic acidosis. It has both proconvulsant
and anticonvulsant properties, and it inhibits cortisol release, with possible
adverse consequences after long-term use. It has been used in anesthesia as it
is unlikely to affect blood pressure, however it has largely been replaced by
newer medications.

21.5 Drugs Used to Treat Sleep Disorders
NONBENZODIAZEPINE GABA AGONISTS
Several of the benzodiazepines are commonly used for sleep, such as
flurazepam, temazepam, quazepam, estazolam, and triazolam. Temazepam,
flurazepam, and triazolam are benzodiazepines used for insomnia; these are
discussed with the other benzodiazepines under the anxiolytic section.
Nonbenzodiazepine agonists, such as zolpidem (Ambien), zaleplon (Sonata),
and eszopiclone (Lunesta)—the so-called “Z drugs”—are similar to these
drugs as they bind at a location close to the benzodiazepine receptor
Pharmacologic Action
Zaleplon, zolpidem, and eszopiclone are structurally distinct and vary in their
binding to the GABA receptor subunits. Benzodiazepines activate all three
specific GABA–benzodiazepine (GABA–BZ) binding sites of the GABAAreceptor, which opens chloride channels and reduces the rate of neuronal and


