<<<PAGE 551>>>

Trauma Affect Regulation: Guide for Education and Therapy
(TARGET). TARGET, an affect regulation therapy, combines CBT
components, such as cognitive processing, with affect modulation. We would
usually consider this for adolescents between the ages of 13 and 19 who
experience maltreatment or chronic traumatic exposure to such things as
community violence or domestic violence. It usually requires 12 sessions,
which focus on past or current situations. As with SPARCS treatment,
gradual exposure may occur in the context of recounting past trauma but is
not a core component of the treatment. A randomized trial with 59 delinquent
girls aged 13 to 17 years who met full or partial criteria for PTSD found that
TARGET reduced anxiety, anger, depression, and PTSD cognitions.
TARGET is a promising treatment for girls with histories of delinquency,
especially to reduce anger and to enhance optimism and self-efficacy.
Psychopharmacological Treatment. Clinicians have used several
pharmacologic agents to treat children and adolescents with PTSD, often
focused on diminishing intrusive thoughts, hyperarousal, and avoidance, with
some success and mixed results. Given the frequent comorbidity of
depressive disorder, anxiety disorders, and behavioral problems associated
with PTSD, we might use a multitude of psychopharmacological agents.
Psychiatrists often use antidepressant agents as adjuncts to psychosocial
treatments in youth with PTSD. Although sertraline and paroxetine are
approved by the FDA in the treatment of PTSD in adults, there is scant
evidence to support their use for the core symptoms of PTSD in youth. An
RCT of TF-CBT plus sertraline compared to TF-CBT plus placebo in 24
children with PTSD found that both groups had a significant reduction in
PTSD symptoms, with no significant difference between the groups. One
multicenter placebo-controlled study of 131 children aged 6 to 17 years with
PTSD tested sertraline over 10 weeks. Results showed sertraline to be a safe
treatment; however, it was not effective when compared to placebo. An RCT
using citalopram did not show the superiority of citalopram over placebo in
the treatment of core PTSD symptoms. There is, however, evidence
suggesting that the use of SSRIs in traumatized children with burns may be
preventive regarding the development of PTSD. Published literature
demonstrates that up to 50 percent of children with moderate to severe burns
develop PTSD. Thus preventive strategies are essential. A randomized




<<<PAGE 552>>>

controlled study of sertraline to prevent PTSD found that children who
received sertraline, flexibly dosed between 25 and 150 mg/day, had a
decrease in parent-reported symptoms of PTSD over 8 weeks compared to a
placebo group. Among the child-reported symptoms, however, there was no
significant difference between the two groups.
Psychiatrists sometimes use antiadrenergic agents to treat dysregulation of
the noradrenergic system in adults and youth with PTSD. α2-Agonists such as
clonidine and guanfacine, for example, have been used to decrease
norepinephrine release, whereas centrally acting β-antagonists such as
propranolol, and α1-antagonists such as prazosin, are hypothesized to
improve hyperarousal and intrusive thoughts through attenuation of
norepinephrine postsynaptically. Although there are some data in adults with
PTSD to support the use of these agents, there are mainly case reports for
youths. There is a suggestion that guanfacine may reduce nightmares in
children with PTSD and that clonidine may diminish symptoms of
reenactment of traumatic events in children. One report of propranolol
treatment in 11 pediatric patients with PTSD from sexual or physical abuse
with a mean age of 8.5 years, who exhibited agitation and hyperarousal,
indicated some decrease in symptoms in 8 of the 11 children studied. Another
open study of transdermal clonidine treatment of preschoolers with PTSD
suggests that clonidine may be efficacious in this population in decreasing
activation and hyperarousal. An additional open trial of oral clonidine with
dosage ranges of 0.05 to 0.1 mg twice daily similarly suggests that this
medication may provide some relief for the symptoms of hyperarousal,
impulsivity, and agitation in young children with PTSD.
Second-generation antipsychotics such as risperidone, olanzapine,
quetiapine, ziprasidone, and aripiprazole have been studied in adults with
PTSD with mixed results. Risperidone and aripiprazole both have FDA
approval for use in children and adolescents with aggression, severe
behavioral dyscontrol, and severe psychiatric disorders; however, there are no
controlled trials with children with PTSD. For example, there is one case
series of three preschool-age children who exhibited symptoms of acute
stress disorder and who had severe thermal burns improved after being
treated with risperidone.
In children and adolescents with PTSD, there is one open-label trial of




<<<PAGE 567>>>

depression severity pretreatment and posttreatment using parent ratings on
the Preschool Reelings Checklist-Scale Version (PFC-S), a 20-item checklist.
Results revealed that both groups showed significant improvement, with
particular improvement in the PCIT-ED group concerning emotion
recognition, child executive functioning, and parenting stress. This pilot
study indicates that PCIT-ED is a promising novel intervention for preschool
depression that deserves further investigation.
Pharmacotherapy
Fluoxetine and escitalopram have FDA approval in the treatment of major
depression in adolescents. Three RCTs of fluoxetine in depressed children
and adolescents demonstrate its efficacy. The common side effects are similar
as for adults: headache, gastrointestinal symptoms, sedation, and insomnia.
Short-term randomized clinical trials have demonstrated the efficacy of
citalopram and sertraline compared with placebo in the treatment of major
depression in children and adolescents. Sertraline was efficacious in two
multicenter, double-blind, placebo-controlled trials of 376 children and
adolescents. The doses of sertraline ranged from 50 to 200 mg a day or
placebo. Nearly 70 percent of the subjects had a greater than 40 percent
decrease in depression rating scale scores (compared with 56 percent in the
placebo group). The most common side effects are anorexia, vomiting,
diarrhea, and agitation.
Citalopram has been demonstrated in one RCT in the United States to be
efficacious in 174 children and adolescents treated with citalopram at doses
of 20 to 40 mg a day or placebo for 8 weeks. Significantly more of the group
on citalopram showed improvement compared with placebo on the
depression rating scale (CDRS-R). A significantly increased response rate
(response defined as less than 28 on CDRS-R) of 35 percent occurred in the
citalopram group, compared with 24 percent of the placebo group. Common
side effects that emerged included headache, nausea, insomnia, rhinitis,
abdominal pain, dizziness, fatigue, and flu-like symptoms.
RCTs to date that have not shown efficacy on primary outcome measures
include those using mirtazapine and tricyclic antidepressants. A metaanalysis of SSRI trials in depressed children and adolescents found the
efficacy of SSRIs compared to placebo with an average response rate of 60




<<<PAGE 631>>>

50 percent of these children developed another anxiety disorder. Studies have
shown significant overlap between separation anxiety disorder and depressive
disorders. In cases with multiple comorbidities, the prognosis is more
guarded. Longitudinal data indicate that some children with severe school
refusal continue to resist attending school into adolescence and remain
impaired for many years.

TREATMENT
The treatment of child and adolescent separation anxiety disorder,
generalized anxiety disorder, and social anxiety disorder are often considered
together, given the frequent comorbidity and overlapping symptomatology of
these disorders. A multimodal comprehensive treatment approach usually
includes psychotherapy, most often CBT, family education, family
psychosocial intervention, and pharmacologic interventions, such as SSRIs.
The best evidence-based treatments for childhood anxiety disorders include
CBT and SSRIs. The comparative efficacy of CBT, SSRI medication, and
their combination (CBT + SSRI) in the treatment of childhood anxiety
disorders was investigated in the NIMH-funded CAMS. This double-blind,
placebo-controlled, multi-site study included 488 children and adolescents
with separation anxiety disorder, generalized anxiety disorder, or social
anxiety disorder. The investigators treated them with either CBT alone, SSRI
medication (sertraline) alone, both CBT and sertraline, or placebo. After an
acute treatment phase of 12 weeks, those in the combined CBT + sertraline
group had an 80.7 percent response rate of much or very much improved on
the clinical global improvement (CGI) rating. Response rates for the CBTonly and sertraline-only groups were 59.7 and 54.9 percent, respectively. The
placebo response was 23.7 percent. Over time, during an open follow-up, the
combination of CBT plus sertraline continued to provide the most efficacy.
All three treatments—CBT, sertraline, and their combination—were superior
to placebo and thus effective treatments in childhood anxiety, but combined
treatment was most likely to help children and adolescents with anxiety
disorders. A trial of CBT may be applied first, if available, when a child can
function sufficiently to engage in daily activities while obtaining this
treatment. For a child with severe impairment, however, a combination of
treatments is recommended. CBT is a first-line evidence-based treatment for




<<<PAGE 633>>>

the treatment of anxiety disorders in children and adolescents.
A large, multisite investigation by the NIMH (Research Units in Pediatric
Psychopharmacology [RUPP]) confirmed the safety and efficacy of
fluvoxamine in the treatment of childhood separation anxiety disorder,
generalized anxiety disorder, and social anxiety disorder. This double-blind,
placebo-controlled study of 128 children and adolescents revealed that 76
percent of children in the group treated with fluvoxamine showed significant
improvement compared with 29 percent of those in the placebo group.
Response to medication was noticeable after only 2 weeks of treatment.
Fluvoxamine dosages ranged from 50 to 250 mg/day in children and up to
300 mg/day in adolescents. Children and adolescents with less comorbid
depressive symptoms had the best response. Youths who responded
continued fluvoxamine for 6 months, and almost all of them continued to be
responders at the 6-month mark.
Several other randomized clinical trials have also supported the efficacy of
SSRIs in the treatment of child and adolescent anxiety disorders. A
randomized, controlled trial found fluoxetine, at a dose of 20 mg/day, to be
safe and effective for children with these disorders, with minor side effects
including gastrointestinal distress, headache, and drowsiness. Also, a
randomized clinical trial for the treatment of generalized anxiety disorder in
children lends support for the efficacy of sertraline. Finally, a large industry
randomized clinical trial of paroxetine in the treatment of children with social
anxiety disorder found that paroxetine was associated with a response in 78
percent of children treated. The dose of paroxetine was 10 to 50 mg/day.
The FDA has placed a “black box” warning on antidepressants, including
all of the SSRI agents, used in the treatment of any childhood disorder,
because of concerns about increased suicidality; however, no individual
childhood anxiety study has found a statistically significant increase in
suicidal thoughts or behaviors.
Currently, we do not recommend using tricyclic drugs due to their
potentially serious cardiac adverse effects. Other agents, including buspirone
and β-adrenergic receptor antagonists such as propranolol, have been used
clinically in children with anxiety disorders, but currently, no data support
their efficacy. Diphenhydramine may be used in the short term to control
sleep disturbances in children with anxiety disorders. Open trials and one
double-blind, placebo-controlled study suggested that alprazolam, a




<<<PAGE 652>>>

Overall, the prognosis is hopeful for most children and adolescents with
mild to moderate OCD. In about 10 percent of cases, OCD may represent a
prodrome of a psychotic disorder in children and adolescents. In youth with
subthreshold OCD symptoms, there is a high risk of developing the full OCD
disorder within 2 years. Childhood OCD is responsive to available
treatments, resulting in improvement, if not complete remission, in the
majority of cases.

TREATMENT
CBT and SSRIs are both efficacious treatments for OCD in youth. CBT
geared toward children of varying ages is based on the principle of
developmentally appropriate exposure to the feared stimuli coupled with
response prevention, leading to diminishing anxiety over time on exposure to
feared situations. CBT manuals can ensure that the therapist can make
developmentally appropriate interventions and that the child and parents
receive comprehensive education.
Treatment guidelines for children and adolescents with mild to moderate
OCD recommend a trial of CBT before initiating medication. However, the
POTS, a multi-site National Institute of Health (NIH)–funded investigation of
sertraline and CBT, each alone and in combination, for the treatment of
childhood-onset OCD, revealed that the combination was superior to either
treatment alone. Each treatment alone also provided encouraging levels of
response. The mean daily dose of sertraline was 133 mg/day in the group
administered the combination treatment, and 170 mg/day for the sertraline
alone group. Improvement with the pharmacologic intervention of childhood
OCD usually occurs within 8 to 12 weeks of treatment. Most children and
adolescents who experienced remission with acute treatment using SSRIs
were still responsive over a year. Among youth with OCD who obtain a
partial response to a therapeutic trial of SSRI treatment, augmentation with a
short-term OCD-specific CBT leads to a significantly greater response.
Evidence shows that higher treatment expectations by patients and families
link to better treatment response, greater compliance with home-based CBT
assignments, less drop out of treatment, and reduced impairment.
In addition to individual CBT, both family and group CBT interventions
are efficacious in the treatment of childhood OCD. Family CBT (FCBT)




<<<PAGE 1248>>>

headaches,
somnolence,
agitation,
insomnia,
sweating, tremor,
anorexia,
dizziness,
constipation
Paroxetine

20–60

Nausea, diarrhea,
dry mouth,
headaches,
somnolence,
insomnia,
sweating,
asthenia, male
sexual
dysfunction,
dizziness

None

Sertraline

50–200

Nausea, diarrhea,
dry mouth,
headaches,
somnolence,
insomnia,
fatigue, tremor,
male sexual
dysfunction,
dizziness

None

75–375

Headaches,
Nausea
somnolence, dry
mouth,
dizziness,
nervousness,
insomnia,

SNRI
Venlafaxine




<<<PAGE 1975>>>

treating depression. However, some are approved by the U.S. FDA for
multiple indications, such as major depression, OCD, PTSD, PMDD, panic
disorder, and social phobia (social anxiety disorder) (Table 21-15). Note that
fluvoxamine is not FDA approved as an antidepressant, a fact that is due to a
marketing decision. It is considered an antidepressant in other countries.
Although all SSRIs are equally effective, there are meaningful differences
in pharmacodynamics, pharmacokinetics, and side effects, differences that
might affect clinical responses among individual patients. This would explain
why some patients have better clinical responses to a particular SSRI than
another. The SSRIs have proven more problematic in terms of some side
effects than the original clinical trials suggested. Quality-of-life–associated
adverse effects such as nausea, sexual dysfunction, and weight gain
sometimes mitigate the therapeutic benefits of the SSRIs. There can also be
distressing withdrawal symptoms when SSRIs are stopped abruptly. This
withdrawal is especially true with paroxetine but also occurs when other
SSRIs with short half-lives are stopped.
Pharmacologic Actions
Pharmacokinetics. A significant difference among the SSRIs is their
broad range of serum half-lives. Fluoxetine has the most prolonged half-life:
4 to 6 days; its active metabolite has a half-life of 7 to 9 days. The half-life of
sertraline is 26 hours, and its less active metabolite has a half-life of 3 to 5
days. The half-lives of the other three, which do not have metabolites with
significant pharmacologic activity, are 35 hours for citalopram, 27 to 32
hours for escitalopram, 21 hours for paroxetine, and 15 hours for
fluvoxamine. As a rule, the SSRIs are well absorbed after oral administration
and have their peak effects in the range of 3 to 8 hours. Absorption of
sertraline may be slightly enhanced by food.
There are also differences in plasma protein–binding percentages among
the SSRIs, with sertraline, fluoxetine, and paroxetine being the most highly
bound and escitalopram being the least bound.
All SSRIs are metabolized in the liver by the CYP450 enzymes. Because
the SSRIs have such a broad therapeutic index, other drugs rarely produce
problematic increases in SSRI concentrations. The most critical drug–drug
interactions involving the SSRIs occur as a result of the SSRIs inhibiting the




<<<PAGE 1976>>>

metabolism of the coadministered medication. Each of the SSRIs possesses a
potential for slowing or blocking the metabolism of many drugs (Table 2116). Fluvoxamine is the most problematic of the drugs in this respect. It has a
marked effect on several of the CYP enzymes. Examples of clinically
significant interactions include fluvoxamine and theophylline (Slo-Bid, TheoDur) through CYP1A2 interaction, fluvoxamine and clozapine (Clozaril)
through CYP1A2 inhibition; and fluvoxamine with alprazolam (Xanax) or
clonazepam (Klonopin) through CYP3A4 inhibition. Fluoxetine and
paroxetine also possess significant effects on the CYP2D6 isozyme, which
may interfere with the efficacy of opiate analogs, such as codeine and
hydrocodone, by blocking the conversion of these agents to their active form.
Thus, coadministration of fluoxetine and paroxetine with an opiate interferes
with its analgesic effects. Sertraline, citalopram, and escitalopram are least
likely to complicate treatment because of interactions.
The pharmacokinetics of vilazodone (5 to 80 mg) is dose-proportional.
Steady-state plasma levels are achieved in about 3 days. The elimination of
vilazodone is primarily by hepatic metabolism with a terminal half-life of
approximately 25 hours.
Pharmacodynamics. The SSRIs are believed to exert their therapeutic
effects through serotonin reuptake inhibition. They derive their name because
they have little effect on the reuptake of norepinephrine or dopamine. Often,
adequate clinical activity and saturation of the 5-HT transporters are achieved
at starting dosages. As a rule, higher dosages do not increase antidepressant
efficacy but may increase the risk of adverse effects.
Table 21-16
CYP450 Inhibitory Potential of Commonly Prescribed
Antidepressants




<<<PAGE 1981>>>

DEPRESSION IN ELDERLY AND MEDICALLY ILL PERSONS. The SSRIs are safe and

well tolerated when used to treat elderly and medically ill persons. As a class,
they have little or no cardiotoxic, anticholinergic, antihistaminergic, or αadrenergic adverse effects. Paroxetine does have some anticholinergic
activity, which may lead to constipation and worsening of cognition. The
SSRIs can produce subtle cognitive deficits, prolonged bleeding time, and
hyponatremia, all of which may impact the health of this population. The
SSRIs are effective in poststroke depression and dramatically reduce the
symptom of crying.
DEPRESSION IN CHILDREN. The use of SSRI antidepressants in children and

adolescents has been controversial. Few studies have shown clear-cut
benefits from the use of these drugs, and studies show that there may be an
increase in suicidal or aggressive impulses. However, some children and
adolescents do exhibit dramatic responses to these drugs in terms of
depression and anxiety. Fluoxetine has most consistently demonstrated
effectiveness in reducing symptoms of depressive disorder in both children
and adolescents. This fact may be a function of the quality of the clinical
trials involved. Sertraline is effective in treating social anxiety disorder in this
population, especially when combined with cognitive-behavioral therapy.
Given the potential adverse effect of untreated depression and anxiety in a
young population and the uncertainty about many aspects of how children
and adolescents might react to medication, any use of SSRIs should be
undertaken only within the context of comprehensive management of the
patient.
Anxiety Disorders
OBSESSIVE-COMPULSIVE DISORDER. Fluvoxamine, paroxetine, sertraline, and

fluoxetine are indicated for the treatment of OCD in persons older than the
age of 18 years. Fluvoxamine, fluoxetine, and sertraline have also been
approved for the treatment of children with OCD (ages 6 to 17 years). About
50 percent of persons with OCD begin to show symptoms in childhood or
adolescence, and more than half of these respond favorably to medication.
Beneficial responses can be dramatic. Long-term data support the model of




<<<PAGE 1984>>>

modestly beneficial for weight loss. A significant percentage of all persons
who take SSRIs, including fluoxetine, lose weight initially but later may gain
weight. However, all SSRIs may cause initial weight gain.
PREMENSTRUAL DYSPHORIC DISORDER. PMDD is characterized by debilitating

mood and behavioral changes in the week preceding menstruation that
interferes with normal functioning. Sertraline, paroxetine, fluoxetine, and
fluvoxamine have been reported to reduce the symptoms of PMDD.
Controlled trials of fluoxetine and sertraline administered either throughout
the cycle or only during the luteal phase (the 2 weeks between ovulation and
menstruation) showed both schedules to be equally effective.
An additional observation of unclear significance was that fluoxetine was
associated with changing the duration of the menstrual period by more than 4
days, either lengthening or shortening it. The effects of SSRIs on menstrual
cycle length are mostly unknown and may warrant careful monitoring in
women of reproductive age.
Off-Label Uses
The anorgasmic effects of SSRIs make them
useful as a treatment for men with premature ejaculation. The SSRIs permit
intercourse for a significantly more extended period and are reported to
improve sexual satisfaction in couples in which the man has premature
ejaculation. Fluoxetine and sertraline are useful for this purpose.
PREMATURE EJACULATION.

The SSRIs may reduce obsessive-compulsive behavior in
people with paraphilias. The SSRIs diminish the average time per day spent
in unconventional sexual fantasies, urges, and activities. Evidence suggests a
more significant response to sexual obsessions than for paraphilic behavior.
PARAPHILIAS.

Obsessive-compulsive behavior, poor social relatedness, and
aggression are prominent autistic features that may respond to serotonergic
agents such as SSRIs and clomipramine (Anafranil). Sertraline and
fluvoxamine have been shown in controlled and open-label trials to mitigate
aggressiveness, self-injurious behavior, repetitive behaviors, some degree of
language delay, and (rarely) lack of social relatedness in adults with autistic
AUTISM.




<<<PAGE 1986>>>

stools are usually dose-related and transient, usually resolving within a few
weeks. Sometimes flatulence and diarrhea persist, especially during sertraline
treatment. Initial anorexia may also occur and is most frequent with
fluoxetine. SSRI-induced appetite and weight loss begin as soon as the drug
is taken and peak at 20 weeks, after which weight often returns to baseline.
Up to one-third of persons taking SSRIs will gain weight, sometimes more
than 20 lb. This effect is mediated through a metabolic mechanism, an
increase in appetite, or both. It happens gradually and is usually resistant to
diet and exercise regimens. Paroxetine is associated with more frequent,
rapid, and pronounced weight gain than the other SSRIs, especially among
young women.
Cardiovascular Effects. All SSRIs can lengthen the QT interval in
otherwise healthy people and cause drug-induced long QT syndrome,
especially when taken in overdose. The risk of QTc prolongation increases
when an antidepressant and an antipsychotic are used in combination, an
increasingly common practice. Citalopram stands out as the SSRI with the
most pronounced effect on QT intervals. A QT study to assess the effects of
20- and 60-mg doses of citalopram on the QT interval in adults, compared
with placebo, found a maximum mean prolongation in the individually
corrected QT intervals were 8.5 milliseconds for 20-mg citalopram and 18.5
milliseconds for 60 mg. For 40 mg, prolongation of the corrected QT interval
was estimated to be 12.6 milliseconds. Based on these findings, the FDA has
issued the following recommendation regarding citalopram use:
20 mg a day is the maximum recommended dose for patients with hepatic
impairment, who are older than 60 years of age, who are CYP2C19 poor
metabolizers, or who are taking concomitant cimetidine (Tagamet).
No longer prescribe at doses greater than 40 mg a day.
Do not use in patients with congenital long QT syndrome.
Correct hypokalemia and hypomagnesemia before administering
citalopram.
Monitor electrolytes as clinically indicated.
Consider more frequent electrocardiograms in patients with congestive
heart failure, bradyarrhythmias, or patients on concomitant medications that




<<<PAGE 1991>>>

Sweating. Some patients experience sweating while being treated with
SSRIs. This sweating is independent of the temperature in the environment.
Nocturnal sweating may drench bed sheets and require a change of
nightclothes. Terazosin (Hytrin), 1 or 2 mg/day, is often dramatically
effective in counteracting sweating.
Overdose. The adverse reactions associated with overdose of vilazodone at
doses of 200 to 280 mg, as observed in clinical trials, included serotonin
syndrome, lethargy, restlessness, hallucinations, and disorientation.
Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitor Withdrawal. The abrupt
discontinuance of SSRI use, especially one with a shorter half-life such as
paroxetine or fluvoxamine, has been associated with a withdrawal syndrome
that may include dizziness, weakness, nausea, headache, rebound depression,
anxiety, insomnia, poor concentration, upper respiratory symptoms,
paresthesias, and migraine-like symptoms. It usually does not appear until
after at least 6 weeks of treatment and usually resolves spontaneously in 3
weeks. Persons who experienced transient adverse effects in the first weeks
of taking an SSRI are more likely to experience discontinuation symptoms.
Fluoxetine is the SSRI least likely to be associated with this syndrome
because the half-life of its metabolite is more than 1 week, and it effectively
tapers itself. Fluoxetine has therefore been used in some cases to treat the
discontinuation syndrome caused by the termination of other SSRIs.
Nevertheless, a delayed and attenuated withdrawal syndrome occurs with
fluoxetine as well.
Drug Interactions
The SSRIs do not interfere with most other drugs. A serotonin syndrome
(Table 21-17) can develop with concurrent administration of MAOIs, Ltryptophan, lithium, or other antidepressants that inhibit the reuptake of
serotonin. Fluoxetine, sertraline, and paroxetine can raise plasma
concentrations of TCAs, which can cause clinical toxicity. Several potential
pharmacokinetic interactions have been described based on in vitro analyses
of the CYP enzymes, but clinically relevant interactions are rare. SSRIs that
inhibit CYP2D6 may interfere with the analgesic effects of hydrocodone and
oxycodone. These drugs can also reduce the effectiveness of tamoxifen




<<<PAGE 1992>>>

(Nolvadex, Soltamox). The combined use of SSRIs and NSAIDs increases
the risk of gastric bleeding.
Table 21-17
Serotonin Syndrome Symptoms
Diarrhea

Myoclonus

Diaphoresis

Hyperactive reflexes

Tremor

Disorientation

Ataxia

Lability of mood

The SSRIs, particularly fluvoxamine, should not be used with clozapine
because it raises clozapine concentrations, increasing the risk of seizure. The
SSRIs may increase the duration and severity of zolpidem (Ambien)-induced
side effects, including hallucinations.
Fluoxetine. Fluoxetine can be administered with tricyclic drugs, but the
clinician should use low dosages of the tricyclic drug. Because the hepatic
enzyme CYP2D6 metabolizes it, fluoxetine may interfere with the
metabolism of other drugs in the 7 percent of the population who have an
inefficient isoform of this enzyme, the so-called poor metabolizers.
Fluoxetine may slow down the metabolism of carbamazepine (Tegretol),
antineoplastic agents, diazepam (Valium), and phenytoin (Dilantin). Drug
interactions have been described for fluoxetine that may affect the plasma
levels of benzodiazepines, antipsychotics, and lithium. Fluoxetine and other
SSRIs may interact with warfarin (Coumadin), increasing the risk of bleeding
and bruising.
Sertraline. Sertraline may displace warfarin from plasma proteins and may
increase the prothrombin time. The drug interaction data on sertraline support
a generally similar profile to that of fluoxetine, although sertraline does not
interact as strongly with the CYP2D6 enzyme.
Paroxetine. Paroxetine has a higher risk for drug interactions than does
either fluoxetine or sertraline because it is a more potent inhibitor of the




<<<PAGE 1993>>>

CYP2D6 enzyme. Cimetidine can increase the concentration of sertraline and
paroxetine, and phenobarbital (Luminal) and phenytoin can decrease the
concentration of paroxetine. Because of the potential for interference with the
CYP2D6 enzyme, the coadministration of paroxetine with other
antidepressants, phenothiazines, and antiarrhythmic drugs should be
undertaken with caution. Paroxetine may increase the anticoagulant effect of
warfarin. Coadministration of paroxetine and tramadol may precipitate
serotonin syndrome in elderly persons.
Fluvoxamine. Among the SSRIs, fluvoxamine appears to present the most
risk for drug–drug interactions. Fluvoxamine is metabolized by the enzyme
CYP3A4, which may be inhibited by ketoconazole (Nizoral). Fluvoxamine
may increase the half-life of alprazolam, triazolam (Halcion), and diazepam,
and it should not be coadministered with these agents. Fluvoxamine may
increase theophylline levels threefold and warfarin levels twofold, with
significant clinical consequences; thus, the serum levels of the latter drugs
should be closely monitored, and the doses adjusted accordingly.
Fluvoxamine raises concentrations and may increase the activity of clozapine,
carbamazepine, methadone (Dolophine, Methadose), propranolol (Inderal),
and diltiazem (Cardizem). Fluvoxamine has no significant interactions with
lorazepam (Ativan) or digoxin (Lanoxin).
Citalopram. Citalopram is not a potent inhibitor of any CYP enzymes.
Concurrent administration of cimetidine increases concentrations of
citalopram by about 40 percent. Citalopram does not significantly affect the
metabolism of, nor is its metabolism significantly affected by, digoxin,
lithium, warfarin, carbamazepine, or imipramine (Tofranil). Citalopram
increases the plasma concentrations of metoprolol (Lopressor) twofold, but
this usually does not affect BP or heart rate. Data on coadministration of
citalopram and potent inhibitors of CYP3A4 or CYP2D6 are not available.
Escitalopram. Escitalopram is a moderate inhibitor of CYP2D6 and has
been shown to raise desipramine (Norpramin) and metoprolol concentrations
significantly.
Vilazodone. Vilazodone dose should be reduced to 20 mg when




<<<PAGE 1994>>>

coadministered with CYP3A4 potent inhibitors. Concomitant use with
inducers of CYP3A4 can result in inadequate drug concentrations and may
diminish effectiveness. The effect of CYP3A4 inducers on the systemic
exposure of vilazodone has not been evaluated.
Laboratory Interferences
In general, the SSRIs do not interfere with any laboratory tests. There have
been some reports of false-positive urine toxicology for benzodiazepines in
patients taking sertraline; if this is suspected, additional confirmation can be
sought via gas chromatography-mass spectrometry.
Dosage and Clinical Guidelines
Fluoxetine. Fluoxetine is available in 10- and 20-mg capsules, in a scored
10-mg tablet, as a 90-mg enteric-coated capsule for once-weekly
administration, and as an oral concentrate (20 mg/5 mL). Fluoxetine is also
marketed as Sarafem for PMDD. For depression, the initial dosage is usually
10 or 20 mg orally each day, usually given in the morning, because insomnia
is a potential adverse effect of the drug. Fluoxetine should be taken with food
to minimize possible nausea. The long half-lives of the drug and its
metabolite contribute to 4 weeks to reach steady-state concentrations. Twenty
milligrams is often as effective as higher doses for treating depression. The
maximum dosage recommended by the manufacturer is 80 mg a day. To
minimize the early side effects of anxiety and restlessness, some clinicians
initiate fluoxetine use at 5 to 10 mg a day, either with the scored 10-mg tablet
or by using the liquid preparation. Alternatively, because of the long half-life
of fluoxetine, its use can be initiated with an every-other-day administration
schedule. The dosage of fluoxetine (and other SSRIs) that is effective in other
indications may differ from the dosage generally used for depression.
Sertraline. Sertraline is available in scored 25-, 50-, and 100-mg tablets. For
the initial treatment of depression, sertraline use should be initiated with a
dosage of 50 mg once daily. To limit the GI effects, some clinicians begin at
25 mg a day and increase to 50 mg a day after 3 weeks. Patients who do not
respond after 1 to 3 weeks may benefit from dosage increases of 50 mg every
week up to a maximum of 200 mg given once daily. Sertraline can be




<<<PAGE 1995>>>

administered in the morning or in the evening. Administration after eating
may reduce the GI adverse effects. Sertraline oral concentrate (1 mL = 20
mg) has 12 percent alcohol content and must be diluted before use. When
used to treat panic disorder, sertraline should be initiated at 25 mg to reduce
the risk of provoking a panic attack.
Paroxetine. Immediate-release paroxetine is available in scored 20-mg
tablets; in unscored 10-, 30-, and 40-mg tablets; and as an orange-flavored
10-mg/5-mL oral suspension. Paroxetine use for the treatment of depression
is usually initiated at a dosage of 10 or 20 mg a day. An increase in the
dosage should be considered when an adequate response is not seen in 1 to 3
weeks. At that point, the clinician can initiate upward dose titration in 10-mg
increments at weekly intervals to a maximum of 50 mg a day. Persons who
experience GI upset may benefit from taking the drug with food. Paroxetine
can be taken initially as a single daily dose in the evening; higher dosages
may be divided into two doses per day.
A delayed-release formulation of paroxetine, paroxetine CR, is available in
12.5-, 25-, and 37.5-mg tablets. The starting dosages of paroxetine CR are 25
mg/day for depression and 12.5 mg/day for panic disorder.
Paroxetine is the SSRI most likely to produce a discontinuation syndrome,
because plasma concentrations decrease rapidly in the absence of continuous
dosing. Paroxetine use should be tapered gradually to limit the symptoms of
abrupt discontinuation, with dosage reductions every 2 to 3 weeks.
Fluvoxamine. Fluvoxamine is the only SSRI not approved by the FDA as
an antidepressant. It is indicated for OCD. It is available in unscored 25-mg
tablets and scored 50- and 100-mg tablets. The effective daily dosage range is
50 to 300 mg a day. A usual starting dosage is 50 mg once a day at bedtime
for the first week, after which the dosage can be adjusted according to the
adverse effects and clinical response. Dosages above 100 mg a day may be
divided into twice-daily dosing. A temporary dosage reduction or slower
upward titration may be necessary if nausea develops over the first 2 weeks
of therapy. Although fluvoxamine can also be administered as a single
evening dose to minimize its adverse effects, its short half-life may lead to
interdose withdrawal. An extended-release formulation is available in 100and 150-mg dose strengths. All fluvoxamine formulations should be




<<<PAGE 2083>>>

development of a life-threatening rash or permanent disfiguration.
Estimates of the rate of severe rash vary, depending on the source of the
data. In some studies, the incidence of severe rashes was 0.08 percent in adult
patients receiving lamotrigine as initial monotherapy and 0.13 percent in
adult patients receiving lamotrigine as adjunctive therapy. German registry
data, based on clinical practice, suggest that the risk of rash may be as low as
1 in 5,000 patients. The appearance of any rash necessitates immediate
discontinuation of drug administration.
It is known that the likelihood of a rash increases if the recommended
starting dose and speed of dose increase exceed what is recommended.
Concomitant administration of valproic acid also increases risk and should be
avoided if possible. If valproate is used, a more conservative dosing regimen
is followed. Children and adolescents younger than age 16 years appear to be
more susceptible to rash with lamotrigine. If patients miss more than 4
consecutive days of lamotrigine treatment, they need to restart therapy at the
initial starting dose and titrate upward as if they had not already been on the
medication.
Laboratory Testing
There is no proven correlation between lamotrigine blood concentrations and
either antiseizure effects or efficacy in bipolar disorders. Laboratory tests are
not useful in predicting the occurrence of adverse events.
Drug Interactions
Lamotrigine has significant, well-characterized drug interactions involving
other anticonvulsants. The most potentially serious lamotrigine drug
interaction involves concurrent use of valproic acid, which doubles serum
lamotrigine concentrations. Lamotrigine decreases the plasma concentration
of valproic acid by 25 percent. Sertraline (Zoloft) also increases plasma
lamotrigine concentrations, but to a lesser extent than does valproic acid.
Lamotrigine concentrations are decreased by 40 to 50 percent with
concomitant administration of carbamazepine, phenytoin, or phenobarbital.
Combinations of lamotrigine and other anticonvulsants have complex effects
on the time of peak plasma concentration and the plasma half-life of
lamotrigine.




<<<PAGE 3426>>>

required course for his advanced degree and being arrested for disturbing
the peace. He had consistently lied to his family about where he stood
with his coursework and about having skipped an examination that would
have qualified him to use his professional degree. He had also not told
them that he had been using marijuana almost daily for several years and
occasionally used hallucinogens. His arrest for disorderly conduct was for
swimming naked in an apartment complex in the middle of the night
while taking hallucinogens.
Mr. A’s use of marijuana began early in college but became daily
during graduate school. He was diagnosed as having bipolar I disorder
early in his senior year at college after an apparent episode of mania. His
mood disorder was well controlled on lithium (Eskalith). During graduate
school, he was episodically compliant with medications, preferring to try
to maintain a state of hypomania. He saw a psychiatrist every 3 to 6
months for medication checks. During his 4 years in graduate school, he
had two clear episodes of depression and began taking sertraline (Zoloft),
100 mg/day, with questionable benefit. Mr. A believed that he could be a
great writer. He spent most of his time reading and trying to write. He
dreamed of going to New York and becoming part of a group of avantgarde writers that would parallel the Algonquin Club of the 1930s or the
Beat poets of the late 1940s. This aspiration and his marijuana abuse
predated his development of bipolar I disorder. He attended class
episodically, nonetheless performing adequately. His last class had no
final examination but required a paper. He planned to write this paper in
the form of a play, involving a dialogue between two thinkers from
different times and cultures. His professor was very excited about this
idea, but Mr. A kept postponing the task until he was forced to extend his
schooling by a year. His other significant interest during this time
involved growing and photographing flowers.
Mr. A was born and raised in a large city. His father had been very
successful in commercial real estate, and his mother, after raising the
children, used the substantial real estate holdings she inherited from her
father to set up a business to manage them. Most of the money was
placed in trust for the patient and his siblings. His mother had total
financial control of the trusts and doled out the proceeds to the children
as they needed them. There was no family history of any psychiatric


