<<<PAGE 1679>>>

possibly by dopaminergic activity and increased production of
norepinephrine.
Venlafaxine and the SSRIs most often have adverse effects because of the
rise in serotonin levels. A lowering of the sex drive and difficulty reaching
orgasm occur in both sexes. Cyproheptadine, an antihistamine with
antiserotonergic effects, and methylphenidate, with adrenergic effects, may
reverse those adverse effects. Trazodone is associated with the rare
occurrence of priapism, the symptom of prolonged erection in the absence of
sexual stimuli. That symptom appears to result from the α1-adrenergic
antagonism of trazodone.
Table 16-12
Some Pharmacologic Agents Implicated in Inhibited Female
Orgasma
Tricyclic antidepressants
Imipramine (Tofranil)
Clomipramine (Anafranil)
Nortriptyline (Aventyl)
Monoamine oxidase inhibitors
Tranylcypromine (Parnate)
Phenelzine (Nardil)
Isocarboxazid (Marplan)
Dopamine receptor antagonists
Thioridazine (Mellaril)
Trifluoperazine (Stelazine)
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
Fluoxetine (Prozac)
Paroxetine (Paxil)
Sertraline (Zoloft)
Fluvoxamine (Luvox)
Citalopram (Celexa)
aThe interrelation between female sexual dysfunction and pharmacologic agents has been

less extensively evaluated than male reactions. Oral contraceptives are reported to decrease




<<<PAGE 1682>>>

Lithium regulates mood and, in the manic state, may reduce
hypersexuality, possibly by a dopamine antagonist activity. Some patients
may have impaired erections.
LITHIUM.

Psychostimulants,
including
amphetamines,
methylphenidate, and pemoline, raise the plasma levels of norepinephrine and
dopamine. They can increase libido. However, with prolonged use, men may
experience a loss of desire and erections.
SYMPATHOMIMETICS.

α-ADRENERGIC AND β-ADRENERGIC RECEPTOR ANTAGONISTS. α-Adrenergic and

β-adrenergic receptor antagonists, used in the treatment of hypertension,
angina, and certain cardiac arrhythmias, diminish tonic sympathetic nerve
outflow from vasomotor centers in the brain. As a result, they can cause
impotence, decrease the volume of ejaculate, and produce retrograde
ejaculation. They can affect libido in both sexes.
The anticholinergics block cholinergic receptors and
include such drugs as amantadine and benztropine. They produce dryness of
the mucous membranes (including those of the vagina) and erectile disorder.
However, amantadine may reverse SSRI-induced orgasmic dysfunction
through its dopaminergic effect.
ANTICHOLINERGICS.

Drugs such as diphenhydramine have anticholinergic
activity and are mildly hypnotic. They may inhibit sexual function as a result.
Cyproheptadine, although an antihistamine, also has potent activity as a
serotonin antagonist. It can block the serotonergic sexual adverse effects
produced by SSRIs, such as delayed orgasm.
ANTIHISTAMINES.

The dominant class of anxiolytics is the
benzodiazepines. They act on the γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) receptors,
which are involved in cognition, memory, and motor control. Because
benzodiazepines decrease plasma epinephrine concentrations, they diminish
anxiety, and as a result, they improve sexual function in persons inhibited by
anxiety.
ANTIANXIETY

ALCOHOL.

AGENTS.

Alcohol suppresses CNS activity generally and can produce




<<<PAGE 1893>>>

adverse effects usually develops, it is prudent to change the antipsychotic if
the patient is particularly concerned that the reaction may recur.
Medication-Induced Acute Akathisia
DIAGNOSIS, SIGNS, AND SYMPTOMS. Akathisia is subjective feelings of
restlessness, objective signs of restlessness, or both. Examples include a
sense of anxiety, inability to relax, jitteriness, pacing, rocking motions while
sitting, and rapid alternation of sitting and standing. Akathisia has been
associated with the use of a wide range of psychiatric drugs, including
antipsychotics, antidepressants, and sympathomimetics. Once akathisia is
recognized and diagnosed, the antipsychotic dose should be reduced to a
minimally adequate level. Akathisia may be associated with a poor treatment
outcome.
EPIDEMIOLOGY. Middle-aged women are at increased risk of akathisia, and the

time course is similar to that for neuroleptic-induced parkinsonism.
TREATMENT. Three necessary steps in the treatment of akathisia are reducing

medication dosage, attempting treatment with appropriate drugs, and
considering changing the neuroleptic. The most efficacious drugs are βadrenergic receptor antagonists, although anticholinergic drugs,
benzodiazepines, and cyproheptadine (Periactin) may benefit some patients.
In some cases of akathisia, no treatment seems to be effective.
Tardive Dyskinesia
DIAGNOSIS, SIGNS, AND SYMPTOMS. Tardive dyskinesia is a delayed effect of

antipsychotics; it rarely occurs until after 6 months of treatment. The disorder
consists of abnormal, involuntary, irregular choreoathetoid movements of the
muscles of the head, limbs, and trunk. The severity of the movements ranges
from minimal—often missed by patients and their families—to grossly
incapacitating. Perioral movements are the most common and include
darting, twisting, and protruding movements of the tongue; chewing and
lateral jaw movements; lip-puckering; and facial grimacing. Finger
movements and hand clenching are also typical. Torticollis, retrocollis, trunk
twisting, and pelvic thrusting occur in severe cases. In the most severe cases,




<<<PAGE 1990>>>

Electrolyte and Glucose Disturbances. The SSRIs may acutely
decrease glucose concentrations; therefore, diabetic patients should be
carefully monitored. Long-term use may be associated with increased glucose
levels, although it remains to be proven whether this is the result of a
pharmacologic effect. Antidepressant users may have other characteristics
that raise their odds of developing diabetes, or may be more likely to be
diagnosed with diabetes or other medical conditions as a result of being in
treatment for depression.
Cases of SSRI-associated hyponatremia and the syndrome of inappropriate
antidiuretic hormone have been seen in some patients, especially those who
are older or treated with diuretics.
Endocrine and Allergic Reactions. The SSRIs can increase prolactin
levels and cause mammoplasia and galactorrhea in both men and women.
Breast changes are reversible upon discontinuation of the drug, but this may
take several months to occur.
Various types of rashes appear in about 4 percent of all patients; in a small
subset of these patients, the allergic reaction may generalize and involve the
pulmonary system, rarely resulting in fibrotic damage and dyspnea. SSRI
treatment may have to be discontinued in patients with drug-related rashes.
Serotonin Syndrome. Concurrent administration of an SSRI with an
MAOI, L-tryptophan, or lithium (Eskalith) can raise plasma serotonin
concentrations to toxic levels, producing a constellation of symptoms called
serotonin syndrome. This severe and possibly fatal syndrome of serotonin
overstimulation comprises, in order of appearance as the condition worsens,
(1) diarrhea; (2) restlessness; (3) extreme agitation, hyperreflexia, and
autonomic instability with possible rapid fluctuations in vital signs; (4)
myoclonus, seizures, hyperthermia, uncontrollable shivering, and rigidity;
and (5) delirium, coma, status epilepticus, cardiovascular collapse, and death.
Treatment of serotonin syndrome consists of removing the offending
agents and promptly instituting comprehensive supportive care. Supportive
care and treatment may include nitroglycerine, cyproheptadine (Periactin),
methysergide (Sansert), cooling blankets, chlorpromazine (Thorazine),
dantrolene (Dantrium), benzodiazepines, anticonvulsants, mechanical
ventilation, and paralyzing agents.




<<<PAGE 2215>>>

and as hypnotics and anxiolytics. Diphenhydramine (Benadryl) is used to
treat neuroleptic-induced parkinsonism and neuroleptic-induced acute
dystonia and sometimes as a hypnotic. Hydroxyzine hydrochloride (Atarax)
and hydroxyzine pamoate (Vistaril) are used as anxiolytics. Promethazine
(Phenergan) is used for its sedative and anxiolytic effects. Cyproheptadine
(Periactin) has been used for the treatment of anorexia nervosa and inhibited
male and female orgasms caused by serotonergic agents. The antihistamines
most commonly used in psychiatry are listed in Table 21-58. Secondgeneration, “nonsedating” H1 blockers, such as fexofenadine (Allegra),
loratadine (Claritin), and cetirizine (Zyrtec) are less commonly used in
psychiatric practice. The H2-receptor antagonists, such as cimetidine, work
primarily on gastric mucosa, inhibiting gastric secretion.
Table 21-59 lists antihistaminic drugs not used in psychiatry, but that may
have psychiatric adverse effects or drug–drug interactions.
Pharmacologic Actions
The H1 antagonists used in psychiatry are well absorbed from the GI tract.
The antiparkinsonian effects of intramuscular (IM) diphenhydramine have
their onset in 15 to 30 minutes and the sedative effects of diphenhydramine
peak in 1 to 3 hours. The sedative effects of hydroxyzine and promethazine
begin after 20 to 60 minutes and last for 4 to 6 hours. Because all three drugs
are metabolized in the liver, persons with hepatic disease, such as cirrhosis,
may attain high plasma concentrations with long-term administration.
Cyproheptadine is well absorbed after oral administration, and its metabolites
are excreted in the urine.
Table 21-58
Histamine Antagonists Commonly Used in Psychiatry
Generic Name

Trade Name

Duration of Action (hr)

Diphenhydramine

Benadryl

4–6

Hydroxyzine

Atarax, Vistaril

6–24

Promethazine

Phenergan

4–6




<<<PAGE 2216>>>

Cyproheptadine

Periactin

4–6

Table 21-59
Other Histamine Antagonists often Prescribed
Class

Generic
Name

Trade
Name

Second-generation histamine 1 receptor
antagonists

Cetirizine

Zyrtec

Loratadine

Claritin

Fexofenadine Allegra
Histamine 2 receptor antagonists

Nizatidine

Axid

Famotidine

Pepcid

Ranitidine

Zantac

Cimetidine

Tagamet

Activation of H1 receptors stimulates wakefulness; therefore, receptor
antagonism causes sedation. All four agents also possess some antimuscarinic
cholinergic activity. Cyproheptadine is unique among the drugs because it
has both potent antihistamine and serotonin 5-HT2-receptor antagonist
properties.
Therapeutic Indications
Antihistamines are useful as a treatment for neuroleptic-induced
parkinsonism, neuroleptic-induced acute dystonia, and neuroleptic-induced
akathisia. They are an alternative to anticholinergics and amantadine for these
purposes. The antihistamines are relatively safe hypnotics, but they are not
superior to the benzodiazepines, which have been much better studied in
terms of efficacy and safety. The antihistamines have not been proven
effective for long-term anxiolytic therapy; therefore, the benzodiazepines,
buspirone (BuSpar), or SSRIs are preferable for such treatment.
Cyproheptadine is sometimes used to treat impaired orgasms, especially




<<<PAGE 2217>>>

delayed orgasm resulting from treatment with serotonergic drugs.
Because it promotes weight gain, cyproheptadine may be of some use in
the treatment of eating disorders, such as anorexia nervosa. Cyproheptadine
can reduce recurrent nightmares with posttraumatic themes. The
antiserotonergic activity of cyproheptadine may counteract the serotonin
syndrome caused by concomitant use of multiple serotonin-activating drugs,
such as SSRIs and MAOIs.
Precautions and Adverse Reactions
Antihistamines are commonly associated with sedation, dizziness, and
hypotension, all of which can be severe in elderly persons, who are also
likely to experience the anticholinergic effects of those drugs. Paradoxical
excitement and agitation is an adverse effect seen in a small number of
persons. Poor motor coordination can result in accidents; therefore, persons
should be warned about driving and operating dangerous machinery. Other
common adverse effects include epigastric distress, nausea, vomiting,
diarrhea, and constipation. Because of mild anticholinergic activity, some
people experience dry mouth, urinary retention, blurred vision, and
constipation.
For this reason, also, antihistamines should be used only at very low doses,
if at all, by persons with narrow-angle glaucoma or obstructive GI, prostate,
or bladder conditions. Either cyproheptadine or diphenhydramine may induce
a central anticholinergic syndrome with psychosis. The use of cyproheptadine
in some persons has been associated with weight gain, which may contribute
to its reported efficacy in some persons with anorexia nervosa.
In addition to the above adverse effects, antihistamines have some
potential for abuse. The coadministration of antihistamines and opioids can
increase the euphoria experienced by persons with substance use disorders.
Overdoses of antihistamines can be fatal. Antihistamines are excreted in
breast milk, so nursing mothers should avoid their use. Because of some
potential for teratogenicity, pregnant women should avoid the use of
antihistamines.
Drug Interactions
The sedative property of antihistamines can be additive with other CNS




<<<PAGE 2220>>>

Cyproheptadine
(Periactin)

PO

Tablets: 4 mg

Adults: 4–20 mg/day

Syrup: 2 mg/5
mL

Children 2–7 yr of
age: 2 mg two to
three times daily
(maximum, 12
mg/day)
Children 7–14 yr of
age: 4 mg two to
three times daily
(maximum of 16
mg/day)

IM, intramuscular; IV, intravenous; PO, oral.

Intravenous (IV) administration of 25 to 50 mg of diphenhydramine is an
effective treatment for neuroleptic-induced acute dystonia, which may
immediately disappear. Treatment with 25 mg three times a day—up to 50
mg four times a day, if necessary—can be used to treat neuroleptic-induced
parkinsonism, akinesia, and buccal movements. Diphenhydramine can be
used as a hypnotic at a 50-mg dose for mild transient insomnia. Doses of 100
mg are not superior to doses of 50 mg, but they produce more anticholinergic
effects than doses of 50 mg.
Hydroxyzine is most commonly used as a short-term anxiolytic.
Hydroxyzine should not be given IV because it is irritating to the blood
vessels. Dosages of 50 to 100 mg given orally four times a day for long-term
treatment or 50 to 100 mg IM every 4 to 6 hours for short-term treatment are
usually effective.
SSRI-induced anorgasmia may sometimes be reversed with 4 to 16 mg a
day of cyproheptadine taken by mouth 1 or 2 hours before anticipated sexual
activity. Several case reports and small studies have also reported that
cyproheptadine may be of some use in the treatment of eating disorders, such
as anorexia nervosa. Cyproheptadine is available in 4-mg tablets and a 2mg/5-mL solution. Children and elderly patients are more sensitive to the
effects of antihistamines than are young adults.




<<<PAGE 3632>>>

components of, 1047
definition of, 16
psychiatric interview and, 16–17
Culture-bound syndromes, 1052
psychiatric diagnoses, 1053–1057
Culture shock, 586
Cushing syndrome, 21, 64, 261
CVA. See Cerebral vascular accident (CVA)
Cyclothymia, 365. See also Bipolar disorders
Cyproheptadine, 597
Cytoarchitecture, brain, 925
Cytochrome P450 (CYP) 2D6 isoenzyme, 604
Cytomegalic inclusion disease, 104
Dantrium. See Dantrolene
Dantrolene, 595
Darwin, Charles, 1040
Date rape drugs, 304
Davanloo, Habib, 753
Daycare centers, 589, 898
D2 blockade of drugs, 592
DBS. See Deep brain stimulation (DBS)
DBT. See Dialectical behavior therapy (DBT)
Dbx1/2 gene, 943
DCX gene, 949
D-cycloserine, 1017
Deaf children, 126–127
Death. See also Bereavement; Grief; Mourning
attended, 856
bad, 847
brain, 847, 848t, 858
definitions, 847
good, 847
legal aspects of, 847
life cycle considerations about, 848
adolescents, 849




<<<PAGE 3712>>>

erasing Pavlovian learning, 1016–1018, 1017t
learning, 1015, 1015f, 1016
nature of learning process, 1016
second-order conditioning, 1016
sensory preconditioning, 1016
Pavlov, Ivan Petrovich
on Pavlovian conditioning, 1014, 1014f
Pavor nocturnus, 499
Pax6 gene, 944
Paxil. See Paroxetine
Pax6 mutation, 946
Pax6 transcription factor, 946
PCT. See Present centered therapy (PCT)
PDGF (platelet-derived growth factor), 949
PE. See Prolonged exposure (PE)
Peabody Individual Achievement Test (PIAT), 84
Peabody Individual Achievement Test-Revised, 143
Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test—III (PPVT-III), 82t
Peabody Vocabulary Test, 85
Pediatric Autoimmune Neuropsychiatric Disorders Associated with
Streptococcus (PANDAS), 206
Pediatric OCD Treatment Study (POTS), 203
Pedigree analysis, 989
Pedunculopontine nuclei, 970
Peer relationships, 590, 901
Penfield, Wilder, 926
Pentazocine, 689
Pentobarbital test dose procedure, for barbiturate withdrawal, 301, 301t
Pentylenetetrazol, 963
Peptidases, 967–968
Perception, of color, 927
Perceptual disturbances, initial assessment of, 10, 13t
Perceptual priming, 1027
Performance IQ (PIQ), 54
Per genes, 1004
Pergolide, 705
Periactin. See Cyproheptadine


