<<<PAGE 960>>>

4.5 Sedative-, Hypnotic-, or AnxiolyticRelated Disorders
Anxiolytic or sedative–hypnotic drugs are on a continuum with their hypnotic
or sleep-inducing effects. In addition to their psychiatric indications,
clinicians also use these drugs as antiepileptics, muscle relaxants, anesthetics,
and anesthetic adjuvants. Alcohol and all drugs of this class are crosstolerant, and their effects are additive. Physical and psychological
dependence develops to these drugs, and all are associated with withdrawal
symptoms. In the practice of psychiatry and addiction medicine, the drug
class that is most important clinically is the benzodiazepines.
The three major groups of drugs associated with this class of substancerelated disorders are benzodiazepines, barbiturates, and barbiturate-like
substances. We discuss each below.
Clinical Features
Specific Agents
BENZODIAZEPINES. Many benzodiazepines, differing primarily in their half-

lives, are available in the United States. Examples of benzodiazepines are
diazepam, flurazepam, oxazepam, and chlordiazepoxide. Benzodiazepines are
used primarily as anxiolytics, hypnotics, antiepileptics, and anesthetics, as
well as for alcohol withdrawal. After their introduction in the United States in
the 1960s, benzodiazepines rapidly became the most prescribed drugs; about
15 percent of all persons in the United States have had a benzodiazepine
prescribed by a physician. Increasing awareness of the risks for dependence
on benzodiazepines and increased regulatory requirements, however, have
decreased the number of benzodiazepine prescriptions. The DEA classifies all
benzodiazepines as Schedule IV controlled substances.
Flunitrazepam, a benzodiazepine used in Mexico, South America, and
Europe but not available in the United States, has become a drug of abuse.
When taken with alcohol, it may lead to promiscuous sexual behavior and
rape. It is illegal to bring flunitrazepam into the United States. Although




<<<PAGE 963>>>

with the benzodiazepines. Table 4-24 lists the equivalent therapeutic doses of
benzodiazepines. Even when users take grossly excessive amounts (more
than 2 g) in suicide attempts, the symptoms include only drowsiness,
lethargy, ataxia, some confusion, and mild depression of the user’s vital
signs. The most lethal overdoses occur when the user takes a benzodiazepine
in combination with other sedatives, such as alcohol. In such cases, small
doses of benzodiazepines can cause death. The availability of flumazenil, a
specific benzodiazepine antagonist, has reduced the lethality of the
benzodiazepines. Flumazenil can be used in emergency departments to
reverse the effects of benzodiazepines.
Table 4-24
Approximate
Therapeutic
Benzodiazepines

Equivalent

Doses

Generic Name

Trade Name

Dose (mg)

Alprazolam

Xanax

1

Chlordiazepoxide

Librium

25

Clonazepam

Klonopin

0.5–1.0

Clorazepate

Tranxene

15

Diazepam

Valium

10

Estazolam

Prosom

1

Flurazepam

Dalmane

30

Lorazepam

Ativan

2

Oxazepam

Serax

30

Temazepam

Restoril

20

Triazolam

Halcion

0.25

Quazepam

Doral

15

Zolpidem

Ambien

10

of




<<<PAGE 2115>>>

In contrast, lorazepam, which has a shorter elimination half-life than
diazepam but is less lipid-soluble, has a slower onset of action after a single
dose because the drug is absorbed and enters the brain more slowly.
However, the duration of action after a single dose is longer because it takes
longer for lorazepam to leave the brain and for brain levels to decrease below
the concentration that produces an effect. In chronic dosing, some of these
differences are not as apparent because brain levels are in equilibrium with
higher and more consistent steady-state blood levels, but additional doses still
produce a more rapid but briefer action with diazepam than with lorazepam.
Benzodiazepines are distributed widely in adipose tissue. As a result,
medications may persist in the body after discontinuation longer than would
be predicted from their elimination half-lives. Also, the dynamic half-life
(i.e., duration of action on the receptor) may be longer than the elimination
half-life.
The advantages of long–half-life drugs over short–half-life drugs include
less frequent dosing, less variation in plasma concentration, and less severe
withdrawal phenomena. The disadvantages include drug accumulation,
increased risk of daytime psychomotor impairment, and increased daytime
sedation.
The half-lives of lorazepam, oxazepam (Serax), temazepam (Restoril), and
estazolam are between 8 and 30 hours. Alprazolam has a half-life of 10 to 15
hours, and triazolam has the shortest half-life (2 to 3 hours) of all the orally
administered benzodiazepines. Rebound insomnia and anterograde amnesia
are thought to be more of a problem with the short–half-life drugs than with
the long–half-life drugs.
Because the administration of medications more frequently than the
elimination half-life leads to drug accumulation, medications such as
diazepam and flurazepam accumulate with daily dosing, eventually resulting
in increased daytime sedation.
Some benzodiazepines (e.g., oxazepam) are conjugated directly by
glucuronidation and are excreted. Most benzodiazepines are oxidized first by
CYP3A4 and CYP2C19, often to active metabolites. These metabolites may
then be hydroxylated to another active metabolite. For example, diazepam is
oxidized to desmethyldiazepam, which, in turn, is hydroxylated to produce
oxazepam. These products undergo glucuronidation to inactive metabolites.
Several benzodiazepines (e.g., diazepam, chlordiazepoxide) have the same




<<<PAGE 2123>>>

The clinical decision to treat an anxious person with a benzodiazepine should
be carefully considered. Medical causes of anxiety (e.g., thyroid dysfunction,
caffeinism, and prescription medications) should be ruled out.
Benzodiazepine use should be started at a low dosage, and the person should
be instructed regarding the drug’s sedative properties and abuse potential. An
estimated length of therapy should be decided at the beginning of therapy,
and the need for continued therapy should be reevaluated at least monthly
because of the problems associated with long-term use. However, certain
persons with anxiety disorders are unresponsive to treatments other than
benzodiazepines in long-term use.
Benzodiazepines are available in a wide range of formulations.
Clonazepam is available in a wafer formulation that facilitates its use in
patients who have trouble swallowing pills. Alprazolam is available in an
extended-release form, which reduces the frequency of dosing. Some
benzodiazepines are more potent than others in that one compound requires a
relatively smaller dosage than another compound to achieve the same effect.
For example, clonazepam requires 0.25 mg to achieve the same effect as 5
mg of diazepam; thus, clonazepam is considered a high-potency
benzodiazepine. Conversely, oxazepam has an approximate dosage
equivalence of 15 mg and is a low-potency drug.
Table 21-43 lists preparations and doses of medications discussed in this
chapter.

BUSPIRONE
Buspirone hydrochloride (BuSpar) is classified as an azapirone and is
chemically distinct from other psychotropic agents. It acts on two types of
receptors, serotonin (5-HT) and dopamine (D). It has a high affinity for the 5HT1A serotonin receptor, acting as an agonist or partial agonist, and moderate
affinity for the D2 dopamine receptor, acting as both an agonist and an
antagonist. The approved indication for this psychotropic drug is for the
treatment of GAD. It was initially believed to be a better alternative to the
benzodiazepine drug group because buspirone does not possess
anticonvulsant and muscle relaxant effects. Reports continue to appear that
some patients benefit from the addition of buspirone to their antidepressant
regimen. Its use in this role is more common than its use as an anxiolytic.




<<<PAGE 2179>>>

this, rapid detoxification protocols have been developed. Continuous
administration of adjunct clonidine—to reduce the adrenergic withdrawal
symptoms—and adjunct benzodiazepines, such as oxazepam (Serax)—to
reduce muscle spasms and insomnia—can permit the use of oral opioid
receptor antagonists on the first day of opioid cessation. Detoxification can
thus be completed within 48 to 72 hours, at which point opioid receptor
antagonist maintenance is initiated. Moderately severe withdrawal symptoms
may be experienced on the first day, but they taper off rapidly after that.
Because of the potential hypotensive effects of clonidine, the BP of
persons undergoing rapid detoxification must be closely monitored for the
first 8 hours. Outpatient rapid detoxification settings must therefore be
adequately prepared to administer emergency care.
The main advantage of rapid detoxification is that the transition from
opioid abuse to maintenance treatment occurs over just 2 or 3 days. The
completion of detoxification in as little time as possible minimizes the risk
that the person will relapse into opioid abuse during the detoxification
protocol.
Alcohol Use Disorder. Opioid receptor antagonists are also used as
adjuncts to cognitive-behavioral programs for the treatment of alcohol use
disorder. Opioid receptor antagonists reduce alcohol craving and alcohol
consumption, and they ameliorate the severity of relapses. Concomitant
opioid receptor antagonist treatment added to an effective cognitivebehavioral program may halve the risk of relapse into heavy alcohol
consumption.
The newer agent, nalmefene, has several potential pharmacologic and
clinical advantages over its predecessor, naltrexone, for the treatment of
alcohol use disorder. Whereas naltrexone may cause reversible transaminase
elevations in persons who take dosages of 300 mg a day (which is six times
the recommended dosage for treatment of alcohol and opioid dependence [50
mg a day]), nalmefene has not been associated with any hepatotoxicity.
Clinically effective dosages of naltrexone are discontinued by 10 to 15
percent of persons because of adverse effects, most commonly nausea. In
contrast, discontinuation of nalmefene because of an adverse event is rare at
the clinically effective dosage of 20 mg a day and in the range of 10 percent
at excessive dosages—that is, 80 mg a day. Because of its pharmacokinetic




<<<PAGE 2184>>>

Rapid Detoxification. Rapid detoxification has been standardized using
naltrexone, although nalmefene would be expected to be equally effective
with fewer adverse effects. In rapid detoxification protocols, the addicted
person stops opioid use abruptly and begins the first opioid-free day by
taking clonidine 0.2 mg orally every 2 hours for nine doses, to a maximum
dose of 1.8 mg, during which time the BP is monitored every 30 to 60
minutes for the first 8 hours. Naltrexone 12.5 mg is administered 1 to 3 hours
after the first dose of clonidine. To reduce muscle cramps and later insomnia,
a short-acting benzodiazepine, such as oxazepam 30 to 60 mg, is
administered simultaneously with the first dose of clonidine, and half of the
initial dose is readministered every 4 to 6 hours as needed. The maximum
daily dosage of oxazepam should not exceed 180 mg. The person undergoing
rapid detoxification should be accompanied home by a reliable escort. On the
second day, similar doses of clonidine and the benzodiazepine are
administered but with a single dose of naltrexone 25 mg taken in the
morning. Relatively asymptomatic persons may return home after 3 to 4
hours. Administration of the daily maintenance dose of 50 mg of naltrexone
is begun on the third day, and the dosages of clonidine and the
benzodiazepine are gradually tapered off over 5 to 10 days.

DISULFIRAM AND ACAMPROSATE
Disulfiram (Antabuse) and acamprosate (Campral) are drugs used to treat
alcohol use disorder. Disulfiram has suffered from a reputation as a
dangerous medication only suitable for highly motivated and strictly
supervised drinkers because of the severe physical reactions the drug causes
after drinking. Experience has shown, however, that at recommended doses,
it is an acceptable and safe medication for dependent drinkers seeking to
sustain abstinence. The properties that constitute disulfiram’s main
therapeutic effect (i.e., the ability to produce unpleasant symptoms after
alcohol intake, also known as disulfiram–alcohol reaction) have created that
perception of dangerousness.
In the most severe cases, when disulfiram is combined with alcohol, severe
clinical conditions can occur. These include respiratory depression,
cardiovascular collapse, acute heart failure, convulsions, loss of
consciousness, and death in rare cases. These potential complications, as well


