<<<PAGE 38>>>

X. Review of systems
XI. Mental status examination
XII. Physical examination
XIII. Formulation
XIV. DSM-5 diagnoses
XV. Treatment plan
I. Identifying Data. This section is brief, one or two sentences, and
typically includes the patient’s name, age, sex, marital status (or significant
other relationship), race or ethnicity, and occupation. Often the referral
source is also included.
II. Source and Reliability. It is important to clarify where the information
has come from, primarily if others have provided information or records
reviewed, and the interviewer’s assessment of how reliable the data are.
III. Chief Complaint. This should be the patient’s presenting complaint,
ideally in his or her own words. Examples include, “I’m depressed” or “I
have a lot of anxiety.”
A 64-year-old man presented in a psychiatric emergency room with a
chief complaint, “I’m melting away like a snowball.” He had become
increasingly depressed over 3 months. Four weeks before the emergency
room visit, he had seen his primary care physician who had increased his
antidepressant medication (imipramine) from 25 to 75 mg and also added
hydrochlorothiazide (50 mg) because of mild hypertension and slight
pedal edema. Over the ensuing 4 weeks, the patient’s condition
deteriorated. In the emergency department, he was noted to have a
depressed mood, hopelessness, weakness, significant weight loss, and
psychomotor retardation and was described as appearing “depleted.” He
also seemed to be dehydrated, and blood work indicated he was
hypokalemic. Examination of his medication revealed that the medication
bottles had been mislabeled; he was taking 25 mg of imipramine
(generally a nontherapeutic dose) and 150 mg of hydrochlorothiazide. He
was indeed, “melting away like a snowball.” Fluid and potassium




<<<PAGE 1545>>>

with a child’s functioning, we can consider several medications, although the
problem often recurs when we discontinue the medications.
Desmopressin, an antidiuretic compound that is available as an intranasal
spray, has shown success in reducing enuresis. The reduction of enuresis has
varied from 10 to 90 percent with the use of desmopressin. In most studies,
enuresis recurred shortly after discontinuation of this medication. Adverse
effects that can occur with desmopressin include headache, nasal congestion,
epistaxis, and stomachache. The most severe adverse effect reported with the
use of desmopressin to treat enuresis was a hyponatremic seizure experienced
by a child.
Antidepressants, particularly imipramine, were the first medications used
for enuresis, and are still used at times. In this case, we are taking advantage
of the anticholinergic side effects of the medication. However, it does have a
considerable side effect profile. Reboxetine (not available in the United
States), a norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor that has a noncardiotoxic side
effect profile, may be a safer alternative to the classically used imipramine in
the treatment of childhood enuresis.
Psychotherapy. Psychotherapy may be useful in dealing with coexisting
psychiatric problems and the emotional and family difficulties that arise
secondary to chronic enuresis. However, the behavioral therapy approaches
described above are the treatments of choice.
Epidemiology
The prevalence of enuresis ranges from 5 to 10 percent in 5-year-olds. It is
about 1.5 to 5 percent in 9- to 10-year-olds, and about 1 percent in
adolescents 15 years and older. The prevalence of enuresis decreases with
increasing age. Enuretic behavior is considered developmentally appropriate
among young toddlers, precluding diagnoses of enuresis; however, enuretic
behavior occurs in 82 percent of 2-year-olds, 49 percent of 3-year-olds, and
26 percent of 4-year-olds regularly.
Although most children with enuresis do not have a comorbid psychiatric
disorder, children with enuresis are at higher risk for the development of
another psychiatric disorder.
Nocturnal enuresis is about 50 percent more common in boys and accounts




<<<PAGE 1674>>>

drugs, and the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), among others,
have been implicated in retarded ejaculation. Also, we should differentiate
delayed ejaculation from retrograde ejaculation, in which ejaculation occurs
but the seminal fluid passes back into the bladder. Retrograde ejaculation
always has an organic cause. It can develop after genitourinary surgery, and it
is also associated with medications that have anticholinergic adverse effects,
such as the phenothiazines.
Other Female Sexual Dysfunction due to a General Medical
Condition. Some medical conditions—specifically, endocrine diseases such
as hypothyroidism, diabetes mellitus, and primary hyperprolactinemia—can
affect a woman’s ability to have orgasms. Several drugs also affect some
women’s capacity to have orgasms (Table 16-12). Antihypertensive
medications, CNS stimulants, tricyclic drugs, SSRIs, and, frequently,
monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs) have interfered with female
orgasmic capacity. One study of women taking MAOIs, however, found that
after 16 to 18 weeks of pharmacotherapy, the adverse effect of the medication
disappeared, and the women were able to reexperience orgasms, although
they continued taking an undiminished dose of the drug.
Table 16-10
Some Pharmacologic Agents Implicated in Male Sexual
Dysfunctions
Drug

Impairs
Erection

Impairs
Ejaculation

Imipramine (Tofranil)

+

+

Protriptyline (Vivactil)

+

+

Desipramine (Pertofrane)

+

+

Clomipramine (Anafranil)

+

+

Amitriptyline (Elavil)

+

+

Psychiatric drugs
Cyclic drugsa




<<<PAGE 1679>>>

possibly by dopaminergic activity and increased production of
norepinephrine.
Venlafaxine and the SSRIs most often have adverse effects because of the
rise in serotonin levels. A lowering of the sex drive and difficulty reaching
orgasm occur in both sexes. Cyproheptadine, an antihistamine with
antiserotonergic effects, and methylphenidate, with adrenergic effects, may
reverse those adverse effects. Trazodone is associated with the rare
occurrence of priapism, the symptom of prolonged erection in the absence of
sexual stimuli. That symptom appears to result from the α1-adrenergic
antagonism of trazodone.
Table 16-12
Some Pharmacologic Agents Implicated in Inhibited Female
Orgasma
Tricyclic antidepressants
Imipramine (Tofranil)
Clomipramine (Anafranil)
Nortriptyline (Aventyl)
Monoamine oxidase inhibitors
Tranylcypromine (Parnate)
Phenelzine (Nardil)
Isocarboxazid (Marplan)
Dopamine receptor antagonists
Thioridazine (Mellaril)
Trifluoperazine (Stelazine)
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
Fluoxetine (Prozac)
Paroxetine (Paxil)
Sertraline (Zoloft)
Fluvoxamine (Luvox)
Citalopram (Celexa)
aThe interrelation between female sexual dysfunction and pharmacologic agents has been

less extensively evaluated than male reactions. Oral contraceptives are reported to decrease




<<<PAGE 1993>>>

CYP2D6 enzyme. Cimetidine can increase the concentration of sertraline and
paroxetine, and phenobarbital (Luminal) and phenytoin can decrease the
concentration of paroxetine. Because of the potential for interference with the
CYP2D6 enzyme, the coadministration of paroxetine with other
antidepressants, phenothiazines, and antiarrhythmic drugs should be
undertaken with caution. Paroxetine may increase the anticoagulant effect of
warfarin. Coadministration of paroxetine and tramadol may precipitate
serotonin syndrome in elderly persons.
Fluvoxamine. Among the SSRIs, fluvoxamine appears to present the most
risk for drug–drug interactions. Fluvoxamine is metabolized by the enzyme
CYP3A4, which may be inhibited by ketoconazole (Nizoral). Fluvoxamine
may increase the half-life of alprazolam, triazolam (Halcion), and diazepam,
and it should not be coadministered with these agents. Fluvoxamine may
increase theophylline levels threefold and warfarin levels twofold, with
significant clinical consequences; thus, the serum levels of the latter drugs
should be closely monitored, and the doses adjusted accordingly.
Fluvoxamine raises concentrations and may increase the activity of clozapine,
carbamazepine, methadone (Dolophine, Methadose), propranolol (Inderal),
and diltiazem (Cardizem). Fluvoxamine has no significant interactions with
lorazepam (Ativan) or digoxin (Lanoxin).
Citalopram. Citalopram is not a potent inhibitor of any CYP enzymes.
Concurrent administration of cimetidine increases concentrations of
citalopram by about 40 percent. Citalopram does not significantly affect the
metabolism of, nor is its metabolism significantly affected by, digoxin,
lithium, warfarin, carbamazepine, or imipramine (Tofranil). Citalopram
increases the plasma concentrations of metoprolol (Lopressor) twofold, but
this usually does not affect BP or heart rate. Data on coadministration of
citalopram and potent inhibitors of CYP3A4 or CYP2D6 are not available.
Escitalopram. Escitalopram is a moderate inhibitor of CYP2D6 and has
been shown to raise desipramine (Norpramin) and metoprolol concentrations
significantly.
Vilazodone. Vilazodone dose should be reduced to 20 mg when




<<<PAGE 1998>>>

muscle tension following abrupt discontinuation of vortioxetine 15 or 20
mg/day. It is recommended that the dose be decreased to 10 mg/day for 1
week before full discontinuation of vortioxetine 15 or 20 mg/day.
Vortioxetine is available in 5-, 10-, 15-, and 20-mg tablets.

SELECTIVE SEROTONIN–NOREPINEPHRINE REUPTAKE
INHIBITORS
There are currently four SNRIs approved for use in the United States:
venlafaxine (Effexor and Effexor XR), desvenlafaxine succinate (DVS;
Pristiq), duloxetine (Cymbalta), and levomilnacipran (Fetzima). A fifth
SNRI, milnacipran (Savella), available in other countries as an
antidepressant, has U.S. FDA approval in the United States as a treatment for
fibromyalgia. The term SNRI reflects the belief that the therapeutic effects of
these medications are mediated by concomitant blockade of neuronal
serotonin (5-HT) and norepinephrine uptake transporters. The SNRIs are also
sometimes referred to as dual reuptake inhibitors, a broader functional class
of antidepressant medications that include TCAs such as clomipramine
(Anafranil) and, to a lesser extent, imipramine (Tofranil) and amitriptyline
(Elavil). What distinguishes the SNRIs from TCAs is their relative lack of
affinity for other receptors, especially muscarinic, histaminergic, and the
families of α- and β-adrenergic receptors. This distinction is an important one
because the SNRIs have a more favorable tolerability profile than the older
dual reuptake inhibitors.
Venlafaxine and Desvenlafaxine
Therapeutic Indications. Venlafaxine is approved for the treatment of
four disorders: MDD, GAD, social anxiety disorder, and panic disorder.
MDD is currently the only FDA-approved indication for DVS.
DEPRESSION. The FDA does not recognize any class of antidepressants as

being more effective than any other. This does not mean that differences do
not exist, but no study to date has sufficiently demonstrated such superiority.
It has been argued that direct modulation of serotonin and norepinephrine
may convey more significant antidepressant effects than are exerted by




<<<PAGE 1999>>>

medications that selectively enhance only noradrenergic or serotoninergic
neurotransmission. This more significant therapeutic benefit could result
from an acceleration of postsynaptic adaptation to increased neuronal
signaling, simultaneous activation of two pathways for intracellular signal
transduction, additive effects on the activity of relevant genes such as brainderived neurotrophic factor, or, quite simply, broader coverage of depressive
symptoms. Clinical evidence supporting this hypothesis first emerged in a
pair of studies conducted by the Danish University Antidepressant Group,
which found an advantage for the dual reuptake inhibitor clomipramine
compared with SSRIs citalopram (Celexa) and paroxetine (Paxil). Another
report, which compared the results of a group of patients prospectively
treated with the combination of desipramine (Norpramin) and fluoxetine
(Prozac) with a historical comparison group treated with desipramine alone,
provided additional support. A meta-analysis of 25 inpatient studies
comparing the efficacy of TCAs and SSRIs yielded the most substantial
evidence. Specifically, although the TCAs were found to have a modest
overall advantage, superiority versus SSRIs was almost entirely explained by
the studies that used the TCAs that are considered to be dual reuptake
inhibitors—clomipramine, amitriptyline, and imipramine. Meta-analyses of
head-to-head studies suggest that venlafaxine has the potential to induce
higher rates of remission in depressed patients than do the SSRIs. This
difference in the venlafaxine advantage is about 6 percent. DVS has not been
extensively compared with other classes of antidepressants concerning
efficacy.
The extended-release formulation of
venlafaxine is approved for the treatment of GAD. In clinical trials lasting 6
months, dosages of 75 to 225 mg a day were effective in treating insomnia,
poor concentration, restlessness, irritability, and excessive muscle tension
related to GAD.
GENERALIZED ANXIETY DISORDER.

SOCIAL ANXIETY DISORDER. The extended-release formulation of venlafaxine

is approved for the treatment of social anxiety disorder. Its efficacy was
established in 12-week studies.
OTHER INDICATIONS. Case reports and uncontrolled studies have indicated that




<<<PAGE 2021>>>

in the emergency management of priapism is an intracavernosal injection of
an α1-adrenergic agonist pressor agent, such as metaraminol (Aramine) or
epinephrine. In about one-third of reported cases, surgical intervention was
required. In some cases, permanent impairment of erectile function or
impotence resulted.
The use of trazodone is contraindicated in pregnant and nursing women.
Trazodone should be used with caution in persons with hepatic and renal
diseases.
Drug Interactions. Trazodone potentiates the CNS depressant effects of
other centrally acting drugs and alcohol. Concurrent use of trazodone and
antihypertensives may cause hypotension. No cases of hypertensive crisis
have been reported when trazodone has been used to treat MAOI-associated
insomnia. Trazodone can increase levels of digoxin and phenytoin.
Trazodone should be used with caution in combination with warfarin. Drugs
that inhibit CYP3A4 can increase levels of trazodone’s primary metabolite,
mCPP, leading to an increase in side effects.
Laboratory Interferences. No known laboratory interferences are
associated with the administration of trazodone.
Dosage and Clinical Guidelines. Trazodone is available in 50-, 100-,
150-, and 300-mg tablets. Once-a-day dosing is as effective as divided dosing
and reduces daytime sedation. The usual starting dose is 50 mg before sleep.
The dosage can be increased in increments of 50 mg every 3 days if sedation
or orthostatic hypotension does not become a problem. The therapeutic range
for trazodone is 200 to 600 mg a day in divided doses. Some reports indicate
that dosages of 400 to 600 mg a day are required for maximal therapeutic
effects; other reports indicate that 250 to 400 mg a day is sufficient. The
dosage may be titrated up to 300 mg a day; then, the person can be evaluated
for the need for further dosage increases based on the presence or the absence
of signs of clinical improvement.

TRICYCLICS AND TETRACYCLICS
The observation in 1957 that imipramine (Tofranil) had antidepressant effects




<<<PAGE 2022>>>

led to the development of a new class of antidepressant compounds, the
tricyclics (TCAs). In turn, the finding that imipramine blocked reuptake of
norepinephrine led to research into the role of catecholamines in depression.
After the introduction of imipramine, several other antidepressant compounds
were developed that shared a basic tricyclic structure and had relatively
similar effects. Later, other heterocyclic compounds were also marketed that
were somewhat similar in structure and that had relatively comparable
secondary properties. At one time, amitriptyline (Elavil, Endep) and
imipramine were the two most commonly prescribed antidepressants in the
United States. However, because of their anticholinergic and antihistaminic
side effects, they are rarely used for depression. Nortriptyline (Aventyl,
Pamelor) and desipramine (Norpramin, Pertofrane) became preferred.
Nortriptyline has the least effect on orthostatic hypotension, and desipramine
is the least anticholinergic. Although introduced as antidepressants, the
therapeutic indications for these agents have grown to include panic disorder,
GAD, PTSD, OCD, and pain syndromes. The introduction of newer
antidepressant agents with more selective actions on neurotransmitters or
with unique mechanisms of action has sharply reduced the prescribing of
TCAs and tetracyclics. The improved safety profiles of the newer drugs,
especially when taken in overdose, also contributed to the decline in the use
of older drugs. Nevertheless, the TCAs and tetracyclics remain unsurpassed
in terms of their antidepressant efficacy. Table 21-20 lists TCA and
tetracyclic drugs and their available preparations.
Pharmacologic Actions
The absorption of most TCAs is complete after oral administration, and there
is significant metabolism from the first-pass effect. Peak plasma
concentrations occur within 2 to 8 hours, and the half-lives of the TCAs vary
from 10 to 70 hours; nortriptyline, maprotiline (Ludiomil), and particularly
protriptyline (Vivactil) can have longer half-lives. The long half-lives allow
all the compounds to be given once daily; 5 to 7 days is needed to reach
steady-state plasma concentrations. Imipramine pamoate (Tofranil) is a depot
form of the drug for intramuscular (IM) administration; indications for the
use of this preparation are limited.
The TCAs undergo hepatic metabolism by the CYP450 enzyme system.




<<<PAGE 2024>>>

weight gain, and sleep disturbances than the SSRIs. The half-lives and
plasma clearance for most TCAs are very similar.
Therapeutic Indications
The indications are similar to those for the SSRIs, which have widely
replaced the TCAs. However, the TCAs represent a reasonable alternative for
persons who cannot tolerate the adverse effects of the SSRIs.
Major Depressive Disorder. The treatment of a major depressive episode
and the prophylactic treatment of MDD are the principal indications for using
TCAs. Although the TCAs are effective in the treatment of depression in
persons with bipolar I disorder, they are more likely to induce mania,
hypomania, or cycling than the newer antidepressants, most notably the
SSRIs and bupropion. It is thus not advised that TCAs be routinely used to
treat depression associated with bipolar I or bipolar II disorder.
Melancholic features, prior major depressive episodes, and a family history
of depressive disorders increase the likelihood of therapeutic response. All of
the available TCAs are equally effective in the treatment of depressive
disorders. In the case of a person, however, one tricyclic or tetracyclic may be
useful, and another one may be ineffective. The treatment of a major
depressive episode with psychotic features almost always requires the
coadministration of an antipsychotic drug and an antidepressant.
Although it is used worldwide as an antidepressant, clomipramine is only
approved in the United States for the treatment of OCD.
Panic Disorder with Agoraphobia. Imipramine is the TCA most studied
for panic disorder with agoraphobia, but other TCAs are also useful when
taken at the usual antidepressant dosages. Because of the potential initial
anxiogenic effects of the TCAs, starting dosages should be small, and the
dosage should be titrated upward slowly. Small doses of benzodiazepines
may be used initially to deal with this side effect.
Generalized Anxiety Disorder. The FDA approves the use of doxepin for
the treatment of anxiety disorders. Some research data show that imipramine
may also be useful. Although rarely used anymore, a chlordiazepoxide–
amitriptyline combination (Limbitrol) is available for mixed anxiety and




<<<PAGE 2025>>>

depressive disorders.
Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder. Patients with OCD appear to respond
specifically to clomipramine, as well as the SSRIs. Some improvement is
usually seen in 2 to 4 weeks, but a further reduction in symptoms may
continue for the first 4 to 5 months of treatment. None of the other TCAs
appears to be nearly as effective as clomipramine for the treatment of this
disorder. Clomipramine may also be a drug of choice for depressed persons
with marked obsessive features.
Pain. The TCAs are widely used to treat chronic neuropathic pain and in the
prophylaxis of migraine headache. Amitriptyline is the TCA most often used
in this role. During the treatment of pain, doses are generally lower than those
used in depression; for example, 75 mg of amitriptyline may be sufficient.
These effects also appear more rapidly.
Other Disorders. Childhood enuresis is often treated with imipramine.
Peptic ulcer disease can be treated with doxepin, which has marked
antihistaminergic effects. Other indications for the TCAs are narcolepsy,
nightmare disorder, and PTSD. The drugs are sometimes used for the
treatment of children and adolescents with ADHD, sleepwalking disorder,
separation anxiety disorder, and sleep terror disorder. Clomipramine has also
been used to treat premature ejaculation, movement disorders, and
compulsive behavior in children with autistic disorders; however, because the
TCAs have caused sudden death in several children and adolescents, they
should not be used in children.
Precautions and Adverse Reactions
The TCAs are associated with a wide range of problematic side effects and
can be lethal when taken in overdose.
Psychiatric Effects. The TCAs can induce a switch to mania or
hypomania in susceptible individuals. The TCAs may also exacerbate
psychotic disorders in susceptible persons. At high plasma concentrations
(levels above 300 ng/mL), the anticholinergic effects of the TCAs can cause
confusion or delirium. Patients with dementia are particularly vulnerable to




<<<PAGE 2026>>>

this development.
Anticholinergic Effects. Anticholinergic effects often limit the tolerable
dosage to relatively low ranges. Some persons may develop a tolerance for
the anticholinergic effects with continued treatment. Anticholinergic effects
include dry mouth, constipation, blurred vision, delirium, and urinary
retention. Sugarless gum, candy, or fluoride lozenges can alleviate dry
mouth. Bethanechol (Urecholine), 25 to 50 mg three or four times a day, may
reduce urinary hesitancy and may be helpful in erectile dysfunction when the
drug is taken 30 minutes before sexual intercourse. Anticholinergic drugs can
also aggravate narrow-angle glaucoma, and the precipitation of glaucoma
requires emergency treatment with a miotic agent. The TCAs should be
avoided in persons with narrow-angle glaucoma, and an SSRI should be
substituted. Severe anticholinergic effects can lead to CNS anticholinergic
syndrome. This syndrome includes symptoms of confusion and delirium,
especially if the TCAs are administered with DRAs or anticholinergic drugs.
IM or IV physostigmine (Antilirium, Eserine) is used to diagnose and treat
anticholinergic delirium.
Cardiac Effects. When administered in their usual therapeutic dosages, the
TCAs may cause tachycardia, flattened T waves, prolonged QT intervals, and
depressed ST segments in the electrocardiographic (ECG) recording.
Imipramine has a quinidine-like effect at therapeutic plasma concentrations
and may reduce the number of premature ventricular contractions. Because
the drugs prolong conduction time, their use in persons with preexisting
conduction defects is contraindicated. In persons with a history of any type of
heart disease, the TCAs should be used only after SSRIs or other newer
antidepressants have been found ineffective, and if used, they should be
introduced at low dosages, with gradual increases in dosage and monitoring
of cardiac functions. All of the TCAs can cause tachycardia, which may
persist for months and is one of the most common reasons for drug
discontinuation, especially in younger persons. At high plasma
concentrations, as seen in overdoses, the drugs become arrhythmogenic.
Other Autonomic Effects. Orthostatic hypotension is the most common
cardiovascular autonomic adverse effect, and the most common reason TCAs




<<<PAGE 2027>>>

are discontinued. It can result in falls and injuries in affected persons.
Nortriptyline may be the drug least likely to cause this problem. Orthostatic
hypotension is treated with avoidance of caffeine, intake of at least 2 L of
fluid per day, and addition of salt to the diet unless the person is being treated
for hypertension. In persons taking antihypertensive agents, reduction of the
dosage may reduce the risk of orthostatic hypotension. Other possible
autonomic effects are profuse sweating, palpitations, and increased BP.
Although some persons respond to fludrocortisone (Florinef), 0.02 to 0.05 mg
twice a day, the drug has potential toxicities. It is preferable to substitute an
SSRI than to use a mineralocorticoid such as fludrocortisone. The TCAs’ use
should be discontinued several days before elective surgery because of the
occurrence of hypertensive episodes during surgery in persons receiving
TCAs.
Sedation. Sedation is a common effect of the TCAs and may be welcomed
if sleeplessness has been a problem. The sedative effect of the TCAs is a
result of anticholinergic and antihistaminergic activities. Amitriptyline,
trimipramine, and doxepin are the most sedating agents; imipramine,
amoxapine, nortriptyline, and maprotiline are less sedating; and desipramine
and protriptyline are the least sedating agents.
Neurologic Effects. A fine, rapid tremor may occur. Myoclonic twitches
and tremors of the tongue and the upper extremities are common. Rare effects
include speech blockage, paresthesia, peroneal palsies, and ataxia.
Amoxapine is unique in causing parkinsonian symptoms, akathisia, and
even dyskinesia because of the dopaminergic blocking activity of one of its
metabolites. Amoxapine may also cause neuroleptic malignant syndrome in
rare cases. Maprotiline may cause seizures when the dosage is increased too
quickly or is kept at high levels for too long. Clomipramine and amoxapine
may lower the seizure threshold more than other drugs in the class. As a
class, however, the TCAs have a relatively low risk for inducing seizures
except in persons who are at risk for seizures (e.g., persons with epilepsy and
those with brain lesions). Although such persons can still use the TCAs, the
initial dosages should be lower than usual, and subsequent dosage increases
should be gradual.




<<<PAGE 2032>>>

Imipramine

Tofranil

150–300

150–300a

Desipramine

Norpramin,
150–300
Pertofrane

150–300a

Trimipramine Surmontil

150–300

150–300

Amitriptyline

Elavil, Endep 150–300

100–250b

Nortriptyline

Pamelor,
Aventyl

50–150

50–150a (maximum)

Protriptyline

Vivactil

15–60

75–250

Amoxapine

Asendin

150–400

200–500c

Doxepin

Adapin,
Sinequan

150–300

100–250a

Maprotiline

Ludiomil

150–230

150–300a

Clomipramine Anafranil

130–250

50 to 250c

aExact range may vary among laboratories.
bIncludes parent compound and desmethyl metabolite.
cEstimated from limited studies.

The TCAs should be avoided in children except as a last resort. Dosing
guidelines in children for imipramine include initiation at 1.5 mg/kg a day.
The dosage can be titrated to no more than 5 mg/kg a day. In enuresis, the
dosage is usually 50 to 100 mg a day, taken at bedtime. Clomipramine use
can be initiated at 50 mg a day and increased to no more than 3 mg/kg per
day or 200 mg a day.
When TCA treatment is discontinued, the dosage should first be decreased
to three-fourths the maximal dosage for a month. At that time, if no
symptoms are present, drug use can be tapered by 25 mg (5 mg for
protriptyline) every 4 to 7 days. Slow tapering avoids a cholinergic rebound
syndrome consisting of nausea, upset stomach, sweating, headache, neck
pain, and vomiting. This syndrome can be treated by reinstituting a small
dosage of the drug and tapering more slowly than before. Several case reports
note the appearance of rebound mania or hypomania after the abrupt




<<<PAGE 2084>>>

Laboratory Interferences
Lamotrigine does not interfere with any laboratory tests.
Dosage and Administration
In the clinical trials leading to the approval of lamotrigine as a treatment for
bipolar disorder, no consistent increase in efficacy was associated with doses
above 200 mg/day. Most patients should take between 100 and 200 mg a day.
In epilepsy, the drug is administered twice daily, but in bipolar disorder, the
total dose can be taken once a day, either in the morning or night, depending
on whether the patient finds the drug activating or sedating.
Lamotrigine is available as unscored 25-, 100-, 150-, and 200-mg tablets.
The primary determinant of lamotrigine dosing is the minimization of the risk
of rash. Lamotrigine should not be taken by anyone younger than 16 years of
age. Because valproic acid markedly slows the elimination of lamotrigine,
concomitant administration of these two drugs necessitates a much slower
titration (Table 21-37). People with renal insufficiency should aim for a lower
maintenance dosage. The appearance of any rash necessitates immediate
discontinuation of lamotrigine administration. Lamotrigine should usually be
discontinued gradually over 2 weeks unless a rash emerges, in which case it
should be discontinued over 1 to 2 days.
Lamotrigine orally disintegrating tablets (Lamictal ODT) are available for
patients who have difficulty swallowing. It is the only antiepileptic treatment
that is available in an orally disintegrating formulation. It is available in 25,
50, 100, and 200 mg strengths and matches the dose of lamotrigine tablets.
Chewable dispersible tablets of 2, 5, and 25 mg are also available.

CARBAMAZEPINE AND OXCARBAZEPINE
Carbamazepine (Tegretol) possesses some structural similarity to the TCA
imipramine (Tofranil). It was approved for use in the United States for the
treatment of trigeminal neuralgia in 1968 and temporal lobe epilepsy
(complex partial seizures) in 1974. Interestingly, carbamazepine was first
synthesized as a potential antidepressant, but because of its atypical profile in
several animal models, it was initially developed for use in pain and seizure
disorders. It is now recognized in most guidelines as a second-line mood




<<<PAGE 2091>>>

Cyclosporine
Desipramine
Dicumarol
Doxepin
Doxycycline
Ethosuximide
Felbamate
Fentanyl
Fluphenazine
Haloperidol
Hormonal contraceptives
Imipramine
Lamotrigine
Methadone
Methsuximide
Methylprednisolone
Nimodipine
Pancuronium
Phensuximide
Phenytoin
Primidone
Theophylline
Valproate
Warfarin
Carbamazepine may increase drug
plasma concentrations of
Clomipramine
Phenytoin
Primidone

Fluoxetine
Fluvoxamine
Gemfibrozil
Itraconazole
Ketoconazole
Isoniazida
Itraconazole
Lamotrigine
Loratadine
Macrolides
Nefazodone
Nicotinamide
Propoxyphene
Terfenadine
Troleandomycin
Valproatea
Verapamil
Viloxazine
Drugs that may decrease
carbamazepine plasma
concentrations
Carbamazepine
(autoinduction)
Cisplatin
Doxorubicin HCl
Felbamate
Phenobarbital
Phenytoin
Primidone
Rifampinb
Theophylline
Valproate

aIncreased concentrations of the active 10,11-epoxide.
bDecreased concentrations of carbamazepine and increased concentrations of the 10,11-

epoxide.
Table by Carlos A. Zarate, Jr., M.D. and Mauricio Tohen, M.D.




<<<PAGE 2260>>>

Kim SW, Shin IS, Kim JM, Park KH, Youn T, Yoon JS. Factors potentiating
the risk of mirtazapine-associated restless legs syndrome. Hum
Psychopharmocol. 2008;(7):615–620.
Kocsis JH, Leon AC, Markowitz JC, Manber R, Arnow B, Klein DN, Thase
ME. Patient preference as a moderator of outcome for chronic forms of
major depressive disorder treated with nefazodone, cognitive behavioral
analysis system of psychotherapy, or their combination. J Clin Psychiatry.
2009;70(3):354–361.
Koibuchi N. The role of thyroid hormone on functional organization in the
cerebellum. Cerebellum. 2013;12(3):304–306.
Kostrubsky SE, Strom SC, Kalgutkar AS, Kulkarni S, Atherton J. Inhibition
of hepatobiliary transport as a predictive method for clinical hepatotoxicity
of nefazodone. Toxicol Sci. 2006;90(2):451–459.
Lai MW, Klein-Schwartz W, Rodgers GC, Abrams JY, Haber DA. 2005
Annual report of the American Association of Poison Control Centers’
national poisoning and exposure database. Clin Toxicol. 2006;44:803–932.
Lam RW, Andersen HF, Wade AG. Escitalopram and duloxetine in the
treatment of major depressive disorder: a pooled analysis of two trials. Int
Clin Psychopharmacol. 2008;23(4):181.
Lapierre YD. A review of trimipramine: 30 years of clinical use. Drugs.
1989;38(Suppl 1):
17–24.
Lieberman DZ, Montgomery SA, Tourian KA, Brisard C, Rosas G. A pooled
analysis of two placebo-controlled trials of desvenlafaxine in major
depressive disorder. Int Clin Psychopharmacol. 2008;23:188–197.
Liebowitz MR, Manley AL, Padmanabhan SK, Ganguly R, Tummala R.
Efficacy, safety, and tolerability of desvenlafaxine 50 mg/day and 100
mg/day in outpatients with major depressive disorder. Curr Med Res Opin.
2008;24:1877–1890.
Liebowitz MR, Quitkin FM, Stewart JW. Antidepressant specificity in
atypical depression. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 1988;45:129–137.
Lojko D, Rybakowski JK. L-Thyroxine augmentation of serotonergic
antidepressants in female patients with refractory depression. J Affect
Disord. 2007;103(1–3):
253–256.
Looper KL. Potential medical and surgical complications of serotonergic




<<<PAGE 3084>>>

the hypothalamus and limbic system directly through the modulation of
neuronal excitability, and they have complex multiphasic effects on
nigrostriatal dopamine receptor sensitivity. Accordingly, evidence indicates
that the antipsychotic effect of psychiatric drugs can change over the
menstrual cycle and that the risk of tardive dyskinesia depends partly on
estrogen concentrations. Several studies have suggested that gonadal steroids
modulate spatial cognition and verbal memory and are involved in impeding
age-related neuronal degeneration. Increasing evidence also suggests that
estrogen administration decreases the risk and severity of dementia of the
Alzheimer type in postmenopausal women. Estrogen has mood-enhancing
properties and can also increase sensitivity to serotonin, possibly by
inhibiting monoamine oxidase. In animal studies, long-term estrogen
treatment results in a decrease in serotonin 5-HT1 receptors and an increase in
5-HT2 receptors. In oophorectomized women, significant reductions in
tritiated imipramine binding sites (which indirectly measure presynaptic
serotonin uptake) were restored with estrogen treatment.
The association of these hormones with serotonin is hypothetically relevant
to mood change in premenstrual and postpartum mood disturbances. In
premenstrual dysphoric disorder, a constellation of symptoms resembling
major depressive disorder occurs in most menstrual cycles, appearing in the
luteal phase and disappearing within a few days of the onset of menses. No
definitive abnormalities in estrogen or progesterone levels have been
demonstrated in women with the premenstrual dysphoric disorder, but
decreased serotonin uptake with premenstrual reductions in steroid levels has
been correlated with the severity of some symptoms.
Most psychological symptoms associated with the menopause are reported
during perimenopause rather than after complete cessation of menses.
Although studies suggest no increased incidence of major depressive
disorder, reported symptoms to include worry, fatigue, crying spells, mood
swings, diminished ability to cope, and diminished libido or intensity of
orgasm. Hormone replacement therapy (HRT) is effective in preventing
osteoporosis and reinstating energy, a sense of well-being, and libido;
however, its use is very controversial. Studies have shown that combined
estrogen–progestin drugs (e.g., Premarin) cause small increases in breast
cancer, heart attack, stroke, and blood clots among menopausal women.




<<<PAGE 3098>>>

Antidepressants and the Immune System. Emerging data indicate that
in animals and humans, antidepressants attenuate or abolish behavioral
symptoms induced by inflammatory cytokine exposure. For example,
pretreatment of rats with either imipramine or fluoxetine (a TCA and SSRI,
respectively) for 5 weeks before endotoxin administration significantly
attenuated endotoxin-induced decrements in saccharine preference
(commonly accepted as a measure for anhedonia), as well as weight loss,
anorexia, and reduced exploratory, locomotor, and social behavior. Similarly,
several studies in humans suggest that antidepressants can ameliorate mood
disturbances in the context of chronic cytokine therapies, especially if given
prophylactically before cytokine exposure. For example, the SSRI paroxetine
significantly decreased the development of major depression in patients
receiving high doses of interferon-α (IFN-α) for malignant melanoma.
Behavioral Interventions and Immunity. It has been known for years
that psychosocial factors can mitigate or worsen the effects of stress, not only
on immune functioning but also on the long-term outcomes of medical
conditions in which the immune system is known to play a role. Therefore,
behavioral interventions aimed at maximizing protective psychosocial factors
might be predicted to have a beneficial effect, not only in terms of mitigating
the effect of stress on immune functioning but perhaps also on diminishing
emotional disturbances that arise in the context of immune system
dysregulation.
Two factors that have been repeatedly identified as protective against
stress-induced immune alterations are social support and the ability to see
stressors as being to some degree under the individual’s control. One study
used a genome-wide scan to assess gene expression activity in socially
isolated versus nonisolated individuals. It found that social isolation was
associated with increased activation of several proinflammatory cytokinerelated pathways and reduced activity in anti-inflammatory cytokine
pathways, as well as in the glucocorticoid receptor, which plays an essential
role in the neuroendocrine control of inflammatory processes. Of interest, the
two types of psychotherapy most often examined in illnesses associated with
immune dysregulation are group therapy, which provides social support, and
cognitive behavioral therapy, which provides cognitive reframing techniques
aimed at enhancing one’s sense of agency (and hence control).




<<<PAGE 3464>>>

Biologic models had existed before. For example, in the 1930s, Papez
theorized that emotions were caused by a circuit connecting the limbic lobe,
amygdala, septal region, and hippocampus. Electroconvulsive therapy was
also developed in the 1930s and used to treat depression as early as the
1940s.
An early influence on biologic explanations for etiology was Otto Loewi’s
discovery of acetylcholine’s role as a neurotransmitter. In proving this, Loewi
(Fig. 35-10) employed a now-famous experiment, published in 1921, in
which he used the saline solution from one frog heart to stimulate the rate in a
second denervated heart, thus proving that a chemical must control the heart
rate. He later showed that this chemical was acetylcholine. This was the first
experiment that showed that a chemical could cause a response absent of
electrical stimulation, thus discovering the critical role of neurotransmitters.
Loewi’s experiment is famous, not only for its scientific value but also
that the idea for the experiment came in a dream. Although he wrote
down the dream when briefly waking from it, he could not make sense of
his scribbles the next morning. Fortunately, he went on to have the same
dream the next night, and when awakening from that, he rushed to his
laboratory to perform what would become Nobel Prize-winning research.
The practical beginning of biologic psychiatry occurred with the
serendipitous discovery of several drugs that could treat mental disorders,
including chlorpromazine for schizophrenia, imipramine and iproniazid for
depression, and lithium carbonate for bipolar disorder. In each case, the initial
importance of the drug was not appreciated. For example, chlorpromazine
was synthesized from promethazine, an antihistamine, in a search for more
stable antihistamine sedatives. It was initially used as an anesthetic adjunct,
and its antipsychotic properties were only later recognized after psychiatrists
began administering it to manic and psychotic patients, again originally as a
sedative.
Imipramine was also first synthesized as an antihistamine, and, following
in the footsteps of chlorpromazine, tried as an antipsychotic before some case
reports convinced the manufacturers to investigate its role as an
antidepressant. Supporting these findings was the discovery that certain




<<<PAGE 3669>>>

Identity
crisis, 899
mental health and, 1035–1036
Identity diffusion, 564
Identity: Youth and Crisis (Erikson), 1073
Ideomotor apraxia, 930
Id inhibitory factor, 945
Idioms of distress, 1052
Idiopathic insomnia, 490
Idiopathic parkinsonism, 594
Idiosyncratic reactions to drugs, 600
Illness anxiety disorder
clinical presentation, 451
comorbidity, 464
course and prognosis, 464
diagnosis, 453
differential diagnosis, 463
epidemiology of, 467
etiology of, 467
and hypochondriasis, 453t
treatment of, 465
Illness management, 867–868
Illusion, 10
Iloperidone, 608
dosing, 614
indications, 614
pharmacology, 614
for schizophrenia, 352t
side effects, 614
Imaginal flooding, 772
Imipramine, 986
for cataplexy, 513
for enuresis, 484
for sleep enuresis, 515
Immediate memory, 932
Immigrants and refugees, psychiatric assessment of, 1049
mental status examination, 1049


