<<<PAGE 438>>>

tablet)
Dextroamphetamine/amphetamine
Adderall

Dextroamphetamine/amphetamine

3 and
older

Adderall XR

Dextroamphetamine/amphetamine
(extended release)

6 and
older

Mydayis

Dextroamphetamine/amphetamine
(extended release)

13 and
older

Lisdexamfetamine

6 and
older

Atomoxetine

6 and
older

Kapvay

Clonidine (extended release)

6–17

Intuniv

Guanfacine (extended release)

6–17

Lisdexamfetamine
Vyvanse
Nonstimulants
Strattera
Alpha Agonists

CNS STIMULANT SIDE EFFECTS. CNS stimulants are generally well tolerated,

and the current consensus is that once a day dosing is preferable for
convenience and to minimize rebound side effects. Long-term tolerability of
once-daily mixed amphetamine salts has shown mild side effects, most
commonly decreased appetite, insomnia, and headache. There are a variety of
strategies for children or adolescents with ADHD who respond favorably to
methylphenidate, but for whom insomnia has become a significant problem.
Clinical strategies to manage insomnia include the use of diphenhydramine
(25 to 75 mg), a low dose of trazodone (25 to 50 mg), or the addition of an αadrenergic agent, such as guanfacine. In some cases, insomnia may attenuate
on its own after several months of treatment.




<<<PAGE 952>>>

Autonomic symptoms
(e.g., sweating,
restlessness, tremor,
and rhinorrhea)

α2-agonist

Clonidine

Anxiety and psychomotor
agitation

Benzodiazepines
Lorazepam
(usually reserved for
the inpatient setting)

Insomnia

Hypnotics

Zolpidem,
zopiclone

Sedating
antidepressants

Trazodone

Atypical antipsychotics Quetiapine
Musculoskeletal pain

GI distress and diarrhea

Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs

Ibuprofen

Antispasmodic agents

Cyclobenzaprine

Antiemetic agents

Prochlorperazine

Peripheral μ-opioid
receptor agonists

Loperamide

Symptomatic Treatment of Opioid Withdrawal. It is also possible to
treat an opioid withdrawal with nonopioid medications, primarily targeting
several uncomfortable withdrawal symptoms. Table 4-23 lists some of these
medications and their uses.
Medications for the Treatment of Opioid Use Disorder
For some individuals, opioid detoxification is not successful, and others may
not feel ready for detoxification, although they may desire freedom from the
daily struggle associated with opioid use and the associated psychosocial
problems. In these individuals, opioid substitution therapy with either
methadone or buprenorphine may be appropriate. For patients who can
complete opioid detoxification, antagonist therapy can help them to maintain




<<<PAGE 1390>>>

stating he could not go on alone. (Courtesy of J. W. Katzman, M.D., and
C. M. A. Geppert, M.D., Ph.D., M.P.H.)

TREATMENT APPROACH
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder
We list some of the most common treatments for PTSD and related disorders
in Table 10-7.
Pharmacotherapy. Currently, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
(SSRIs), particularly sertraline and paroxetine, have the most robust evidence
for efficacy. There are promising initial findings for the noradrenergic and
serotonergic reuptake inhibitor venlafaxine, the atypical antipsychotic
risperidone, and the anticonvulsant topiramate. We lack evidence for the
effectiveness of benzodiazepines, despite their continued use in practice; one
meta-analysis went so far as to consider benzodiazepines relatively
contraindicated in this population. Finally, the alpha 1-adrenergic antagonist
prazosin and the atypical antipsychotics show some efficacy in treatmentresistant PTSD, and prazosin shows effectiveness for treating nightmares.
Insomnia is prevalent and disabling in chronic PTSD, with low-dose
trazodone preferable to benzodiazepines. The orexin antagonist suvorexant is
promising for managing trauma-related insomnia.
Table 10-7
Treatments for PTSD
Pharmacologic
interventions

Strong evidence
SSRIs (sertraline, paroxetine)
Promising initial evidence
SNRI (venlafaxine)
Atypical antipsychotic (risperidone)
Anticonvulsant (topiramate)
Limited evidence
Alpha 1-adrenergic antagonist (prazosin)




<<<PAGE 1391>>>

Lack of evidence
Benzodiazepines
Symptom-specific
Prazosin (nightmares)
Orexin (insomnia)
Trazodone (insomnia)
Psychotherapeutic
interventions

Trauma-focused cognitive-behavioral therapy
(TFCBT),
Prolonged exposure (PE) therapy
Cognitive processing therapy (CPT)
Eye movement desensitization and
reprocessing therapy (EMDR)
Present centered therapy (PCT)
Cognitive processing therapy (CPT)
Psychodynamic psychotherapy
Group and family therapy

Psychotherapy. Several therapies are effective for PTSD and related
disorders; we list these in Table 10-7. Trauma-focused cognitive-behavioral
therapy (TFCBT) includes prolonged exposure (PE) therapy, which focuses
on reexperiencing the traumatic event through repeatedly engaging with the
memories (imaginal exposure) and everyday reminders (in vivo exposure)
rather than avoiding triggers. Eye movement desensitization and reprocessing
therapy (EMDR) involves repeatedly recalling distressing images while
receiving sensory inputs. Present centered therapy (PCT) focuses on the
current relationship and work challenges rather than the trauma, and
cognitive processing therapy (CPT) emphasizes correcting faulty attributions
including posttraumatic overgeneralizations of the world as dangerous,
uncontrollable, and unpredictable. Psychodynamic psychotherapy may also
be useful in the treatment of many patients with PTSD. In some cases,
reconstruction of the traumatic events with associated abreaction and
catharsis may be therapeutic. Still, psychotherapy must be tailored to the
individual, because reexperiencing the trauma overwhelms some patients.
In addition to individual therapy techniques, group therapy and family




<<<PAGE 1436>>>

Electroconvulsive therapy (for refractory depression with persistent
melancholic features across all dissociative identity disorder
alters)
Mood stabilizers (more useful for PTSD and anxiety than mood
swings)
Divalproex
Lamotrigine
Oral or intramuscular benzodiazepines
Medications for sleep problems
Low-dose trazodone
Low-dose mirtazapine
Low-dose tricyclic antidepressants
Low-dose neuroleptics
Benzodiazepines (often less helpful for sleep problems in this
population)
Zolpidem
Anticholinergic agents (diphenhydramine, hydroxyzine)
Medications for self-injury, addictions
Naltrexone
Brainwashing
There are no empirical treatment studies of individuals subjected to extreme
coercion applied in the service of indoctrination into a belief system or an
attempt at identity alteration. The basic principles of phased trauma treatment
would seem to provide an organizing framework for their care, as for victims
of other forms of torture. Family and social interventions may be necessary
because of the duress and disruption accompanying the precipitating events
and the social effects of the profound changes in the patient’s attitudes,
behaviors, and beliefs, as well as sequestration from everyday events during
the period of captivity.
Ganser Syndrome
No systematic treatment studies have been conducted, given the rarity of this
condition. In most case reports, the patient has been hospitalized and
provided with a protective and supportive environment. In some instances,




<<<PAGE 1523>>>

antidepressants that may be helpful include other SSRIs (although concerns
about prolonged QT intervals with higher doses limit the utility of citalopram
in this population), TCAs (particularly amitriptyline and desipramine),
trazodone, and monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs). Bupropion is
contraindicated due to an increased risk of seizure in this population. In
general, most of the antidepressants other than fluoxetine have been effective
at dosages usually given in the treatment of depressive disorders. Medication
is helpful in patients with comorbid depressive disorders and bulimia
nervosa. Topiramate may have some efficacy in reducing binge episodes in
bulimia nervosa, as may lisdexamfetamine. Evidence indicates that CBT and
medications (particularly fluoxetine) are the most effective combination.
Treatment of Binge-Eating Disorder
Psychotherapy. CBT is the most effective psychological treatment for
binge-eating disorder and should be considered a first-line treatment. CBT
can lead to decreases in binge eating and associated problems (e.g.,
depression); however, studies have not shown marked weight loss as a result
of CBT. CBT combined with psychopharmacological treatments such as
SSRIs shows better results than CBT alone. Exercise has also shown a
reduction in binge eating when combined with CBT. Interpersonal
psychotherapy (IPT) is also effective in the treatment of binge-eating
disorder; however, therapy focuses more on the interpersonal problems that
contribute to the disorder rather than disturbances in eating behavior. There is
also some evidence for the use of dialectical behavior therapy for bingeeating disorder.
Psychopharmacotherapy. Symptoms of binge eating may benefit from
medication treatment, with strong evidence supporting the use of
lisdexamfetamine for both weight loss and reduction of binge episodes.
Antidepressant medications have demonstrated improvement in binge eating,
but typically do not result in sustained weight loss; these include fluoxetine,
fluvoxamine, citalopram, escitalopram, sertraline, duloxetine, and bupropion.
The anticonvulsants topiramate and zonisamide may improve binge-eating
disorder, particularly with moderate weight loss. Topiramate may also reduce
binge episodes.




<<<PAGE 1558>>>

frustrated and concerned about sleeplessness and its effect on her work.
Her work involves sitting at a microscope for 6 hours out of a 9-hour
working day and meticulously documenting her findings. Her final output
has not suffered, but she must now “double check” for accuracy.
She describes herself as a worrier and a Type-A personality. The
patient does not know how to relax. For example, on vacation she
continually worries about things that can go wrong. She will not even
begin to unwind until she has arrived at the destination, checked in, and
unpacked. Even then, she is unable to relax.
Medical history is unremarkable except for tonsillectomy (age 16
years),
migraine
headaches
(current),
and
diet-controlled
hypercholesterolemia. She takes naproxen as needed for headache. She
does not currently drink caffeinated beverages, smoke tobacco, or drink
alcoholic beverages. She does not use recreational drugs.
The problem with insomnia began after relocation to a new city and
place of employment. She attributes her insomnia to the noisy
neighborhood in which she now lives. She first sought treatment 18
months ago. Her family practice physician diagnosed depression, and she
was started on fluoxetine that made her “climb the walls.” Antihistamines
were tried next with similar results. She was then switched to low-dose
trazodone (for sleep) and developed nausea. After these medical
interventions, she sought medical care elsewhere. Zolpidem 5 mg was
prescribed, but it made her feel drugged and upon discontinuation she had
withdrawal effects. Another family practice physician diagnosed
“nonspecific anxiety disorder” and began buspirone; an experience she
describes as “having an alien try to climb out of my skin.” Buspirone was
discontinued. Paroxetine was tried for 8 weeks with no effect. Finally, a
psychiatrist was consulted, who diagnosed adult attention-deficit disorder
(without hyperactivity) and suggested treatment with methylphenidate. At
this point, the patient was convinced that a stimulant would not help her
insomnia and demanded referral to a sleep disorders center.
DISCUSSION
Ms. W’s symptoms fall into the broad category of an insomnia, and the
symptoms began after having moved from one city to another.
Environmental sleep disorder (noise) and adjustment sleep disorder (new




<<<PAGE 1625>>>

Insomnia, however, usually returns upon discontinuation of dosing.
The clinical practice guideline from the American Academy of Sleep
Medicine recommends the use of suvorexant, eszopiclone, zaleplon,
zolpidem, triazolam, temazepam, ramelteon, and doxepin for the treatment of
insomnia (with specific agents having different indications for sleep-onset or
sleep-maintenance insomnia). They recommend against the use of trazodone,
tiagabine, diphenhydramine, melatonin, tryptophan, and valerian for
insomnia treatment.
Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy for Insomnia. Cognitive-behavioral
therapy for insomnia (CBTi), as a treatment modality, uses a combination of
behavioral and cognitive techniques to overcome dysfunctional sleep
behaviors, misperceptions, and distorted, disruptive thoughts about sleep.
Behavioral techniques include universal sleep hygiene, stimulus control
therapy, sleep restriction therapy, relaxation therapies, and biofeedback.
Studies repeatedly show significant, sustained improvement in sleep
symptoms, including number and duration of awakenings and sleep latency,
from CBTi. Short-term benefits are similar to that of medication, but CBTi
tends to have lasting benefits, even 36 months after treatment. With the
cessation of the medication, insomnia frequently returns and is sometimes
accompanied by rebound insomnia. CBTi has no apparent adverse effects.
There are no established “best practice” guidelines for length or quantity of
sessions. CBTi, however, is not without limitations. Most data do not
compare the efficacy of the individual components of CBTi. However, sleep
hygiene education alone produces an insignificant effect on sleep. Intuitively,
the multicomponent approach addresses many of the variables contributing to
insomnia. Other limitations of CBTi include lack of or unavailability of
trained specialists, cost of sessions, and noncoverage by insurance carriers.
The effects of CBTi take longer to emerge than the effects of medications.
Usually, when patients finally come for treatment of their insomnia, they are
desperate. It is challenging to convince them to try a therapy that may take
several weeks before it will provide relief. Furthermore, patients do not
assume a passive role in this type of therapy; they must be active participants.
Many individuals not only want a “quick fix,” but they also want to undergo
a procedure or have something administered rather than be involved in the
therapeutic process. For optimal CBTi, patients must commit to come to




<<<PAGE 1675>>>

Trazodone (Desyrel)b

–

–

Tranylcypromine (Parnate)

+

+

Phenelzine (Nardil)

+

+

Pargyline (Eutonyl)

–

+

Isocarboxazid (Marplan)

–

+

Lithium (Eskalith)

+

+

Amphetamines

+

+

Fluoxetine (Prozac)c

–

+

Fluphenazine (Prolixin)

+

+

Thioridazine (Mellaril)

+

+

Chlorprothixene
(Taractan)

–

+

Mesoridazine (Serentil)

–

+

Perphenazine (Trilafon)

–

+

Trifluoperazine (Stelazine)

–

+

Reserpine (Serpasil)

+

+

Haloperidol (Haldol)

–

+

–

+

Monoamine oxidase inhibitors

Other mood-active drugs

Antipsychoticsd

Antianxiety agente
Chlordiazepoxide
(Librium)
Antihypertensive drugs




<<<PAGE 1679>>>

possibly by dopaminergic activity and increased production of
norepinephrine.
Venlafaxine and the SSRIs most often have adverse effects because of the
rise in serotonin levels. A lowering of the sex drive and difficulty reaching
orgasm occur in both sexes. Cyproheptadine, an antihistamine with
antiserotonergic effects, and methylphenidate, with adrenergic effects, may
reverse those adverse effects. Trazodone is associated with the rare
occurrence of priapism, the symptom of prolonged erection in the absence of
sexual stimuli. That symptom appears to result from the α1-adrenergic
antagonism of trazodone.
Table 16-12
Some Pharmacologic Agents Implicated in Inhibited Female
Orgasma
Tricyclic antidepressants
Imipramine (Tofranil)
Clomipramine (Anafranil)
Nortriptyline (Aventyl)
Monoamine oxidase inhibitors
Tranylcypromine (Parnate)
Phenelzine (Nardil)
Isocarboxazid (Marplan)
Dopamine receptor antagonists
Thioridazine (Mellaril)
Trifluoperazine (Stelazine)
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
Fluoxetine (Prozac)
Paroxetine (Paxil)
Sertraline (Zoloft)
Fluvoxamine (Luvox)
Citalopram (Celexa)
aThe interrelation between female sexual dysfunction and pharmacologic agents has been

less extensively evaluated than male reactions. Oral contraceptives are reported to decrease




<<<PAGE 1772>>>

correct diagnosis. With a likelihood of subcortical seizure-like activity,
medications that lower the seizure threshold can aggravate the situation.
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), trazodone, and buspirone are
useful in reducing impulsivity and aggression. Propranolol and other βadrenergic receptor antagonists and calcium channel inhibitors have also been
effective in some cases.
Some neurosurgeons have performed operative treatments for intractable
violence and aggression. No evidence indicates that such treatment is
effective.
Kleptomania
Because true kleptomania is rare, reports of treatment tend to be individual
case descriptions or a short series of cases. Insight-oriented psychotherapy
and psychoanalysis have been successful but depend on patients’
motivations. Those who feel guilt and shame may be helped by insightoriented psychotherapy because of their increased motivation to change their
behavior.
Case reports and case series suggest that cognitive-behavioral therapy may
be helpful. Specific behavior therapies, including systematic desensitization,
aversive conditioning, and a combination of aversive conditioning and altered
social contingencies, have been reported successful, even when motivation
was lacking. SSRIs, such as fluoxetine and fluvoxamine, appear to be
effective in some patients with kleptomania; however, there are also reports
of fluoxetine having no benefit in kleptomania. Case reports indicated
successful treatment with tricyclic drugs, trazodone, lithium, valproate,
topiramate, naltrexone, methylphenidate, and electroconvulsive therapy. In a
controlled trial of antidepressants, escitalopram was found to have no benefit
in treating kleptomania. Though limited by small sample size and open-label
design, high-dose naltrexone was reported to be effective in reducing the urge
to steal in patients with kleptomania.
Pyromania
Little has been written about the treatment of pyromania, and treating
firesetters has been difficult because of their lack of motivation. No single
treatment has been proved effective; as a result, most therapists try various




<<<PAGE 1988>>>

only one percentage point higher than the placebo rate. Fluoxetine is the most
likely to cause headaches. On the other hand, all SSRIs are effective
prophylaxis against both migraine and tension-type headaches in many
persons.
Central Nervous System Adverse Effects
ANXIETY. Fluoxetine may cause anxiety, particularly in the first few weeks of
treatment. However, these initial effects usually give way to an overall
reduction in anxiety after a few weeks. Increased anxiety is caused
considerably less frequently by paroxetine and escitalopram, which may be
better choices if sedation is desired, as in mixed anxiety and depressive
disorders.
The primary effect SSRIs exert in the area of
insomnia and sedation is improved sleep resulting from the treatment of
depression and anxiety. However, as many as 25 percent of persons taking
SSRIs note trouble sleeping, excessive somnolence, or overwhelming fatigue.
Fluoxetine is the most likely to cause insomnia, for which reason it is often
taken in the morning. Sertraline and fluvoxamine are about equally likely to
cause insomnia as somnolence, and citalopram and especially paroxetine
often cause somnolence. Escitalopram is more likely to interfere with sleep
than its isomer, citalopram. Some persons benefit from taking their SSRI
dose before going to bed, but others prefer to take it the morning. SSRIinduced insomnia can be treated with benzodiazepines, trazodone (Desyrel)
(clinicians must explain the risk of priapism), or other sedating medicines.
Significant SSRI-induced somnolence often requires switching to the use of
another SSRI or bupropion.
INSOMNIA AND SEDATION.

OTHER SLEEP EFFECTS. Many persons taking SSRIs report recalling extremely

vivid dreams or nightmares. They describe sleep as “busy.” Other sleep
effects of the SSRIs include bruxism, restless legs, nocturnal myoclonus, and
sweating.
Emotional blunting is a largely overlooked but
frequent side effect associated with chronic SSRI use. Patients report an
EMOTIONAL BLUNTING.




<<<PAGE 2014>>>

Weight gain

12

Dizziness

7

Myalgias

5

Disturbing dreams

4

A small number of persons experience orthostatic hypotension while
taking mirtazapine. Although no data exist regarding the effects on fetal
development, mirtazapine should be used with caution during pregnancy.
Mirtazapine use by pregnant women has not been studied, but because the
drug may be excreted in breast milk, it should not be taken by nursing
mothers. Because of the risk of agranulocytosis associated with mirtazapine
use, persons should be attuned to signs of infection. Because of the sedating
effects of mirtazapine, persons should determine the degree to which they are
affected before engaging in driving or other potentially dangerous activities.
Drug Interactions
Mirtazapine can potentiate the sedation of alcohol and benzodiazepines.
Mirtazapine should not be used within 14 days of use of an MAOI.
Laboratory Interferences
No laboratory interferences have yet been described for mirtazapine.
Dosage and Administration
Mirtazapine is available in 15-, 30-, and 45-mg scored tablets. Mirtazapine is
also available in 15-, 30-, and 45-mg orally disintegrating tablets for persons
who have difficulty swallowing pills. If persons fail to respond to the initial
dose of 15 mg of mirtazapine before sleep, the dose may be increased in 15mg increments every 5 days to a maximum of 45 mg before sleep. Lower
dosages may be necessary for elderly persons or persons with renal or hepatic
insufficiency.

NEFAZODONE AND TRAZODONE
Nefazodone (Serzone) and Trazodone (Desyrel) are mechanistically and




<<<PAGE 2015>>>

structurally related drugs approved as treatments for depression. Nefazodone
(Serzone) is an analog of trazodone. When nefazodone was introduced in
1995, there were expectations that it would become widely used because it
did not cause the sexual side effects and sleep disruption associated with the
selective SSRIs. Although it was devoid of these side effects, it was
nevertheless found to produce problematic sedation, nausea, dizziness, and
visual disturbances. Consequently, nefazodone was never extensively
adopted in clinical practice. This fact, as well as reports of rare cases of
sometimes fatal hepatotoxicity, led the original manufacturer to discontinue
the production of branded nefazodone in 2004. Generic nefazodone remains
available in the United States.
Trazodone received FDA approval in 1981 as a treatment for MDD. Its
novel triazolopyridine chemical structure distinguished it from the TCAs, and
clinical trials suggested improved safety and tolerability compared with
TCAs. There were high expectations that it would replace the older drugs as a
mainstay of treatment for depression. However, the extreme sedation
associated with trazodone, even at subtherapeutic doses, limited the clinical
effectiveness of the drug. However, its soporific properties made trazodone a
favorite alternative to standard hypnotics as a sleep-inducing agent. Unlike
conventional sleeping pills, trazodone is not a controlled substance.
Nefazodone
Pharmacologic Actions. Nefazodone is rapidly and completely absorbed
but is then extensively metabolized so that the bioavailability of active
compounds is about 20 percent of the oral dose. Its half-life is 2 to 4 hours.
Steady-state concentrations of nefazodone and its principal active metabolite,
hydroxynefazodone, are achieved within 4 to 5 days. Metabolism of
nefazodone in elderly persons, especially women, is about half of that seen in
younger persons, so lowered doses are recommended for elderly persons. An
important metabolite of nefazodone is meta-chlorophenylpiperazine (mCPP),
which has some serotonergic effects and may cause migraine, anxiety, and
weight loss.
Although nefazodone is an inhibitor of serotonin uptake and, more weakly,
of norepinephrine reuptake, its antagonism of serotonin 5-HTA receptors is
thought to produce its antianxiety and antidepressant effects. Nefazodone is




<<<PAGE 2018>>>

is necessary for persons with renal disease.
Drug Interactions and Laboratory Interferences. Nefazodone should
not be given concomitantly with MAOIs. Also, nefazodone has particular
drug–drug interactions with the triazolobenzodiazepines triazolam (Halcion)
and alprazolam (Xanax) because of the inhibition of CYP3A4 by nefazodone.
Potentially elevated levels of each of these drugs can develop after
administration of nefazodone, but the levels of nefazodone are generally not
affected. The dose of triazolam should be lowered by 75 percent, and the
dose of alprazolam should be lowered by 50 percent, when given
concomitantly with nefazodone.
Nefazodone may slow the metabolism of digoxin; therefore, digoxin levels
should be monitored carefully in persons taking both medications.
Nefazodone also slows the metabolism of haloperidol (Haldol) so that the
dosage of haloperidol should be reduced in persons taking both medications.
The addition of nefazodone may also exacerbate the adverse effects of
lithium carbonate (Eskalith).
There are no known laboratory interferences associated with nefazodone.
Dosage and Clinical Guidelines. Nefazodone is available in 50-, 200-,
and 250-mg unscored tablets and 100- and 150-mg scored tablets. The
recommended starting dosage of nefazodone is 100 mg twice a day, but 50
mg twice a day may be better tolerated, especially by elderly persons. The
dosage should be slowly raised in increments of 100 to 200 mg a day at
intervals of no less than 1 week per increase to limit the development of
adverse effects. The optimal dosage is 300 to 600 mg daily in two divided
doses. However, some studies report that nefazodone is effective when taken
once a day, especially at bedtime. Geriatric persons should receive dosages
about two-thirds of the usual nongeriatric dosages, with a maximum of 400
mg a day. Similar to other antidepressants, the clinical benefit of nefazodone
usually appears after 2 to 4 weeks of treatment. Patients with the
premenstrual syndrome are treated with a flexible dosage that averages about
250 mg a day.
Trazodone




<<<PAGE 2019>>>

Pharmacologic Actions. Trazodone is readily absorbed from the GI tract
and reaches peak plasma levels in about 1 hour. It has a half-life of 5 to 9
hours. Trazodone is metabolized in the liver, and 75 percent of its metabolites
are excreted in the urine.
Trazodone is a weak inhibitor of serotonin reuptake and a potent antagonist
of serotonin 5-HT2A and 5-HT2C receptors. The active metabolite of
trazodone is mCPP, which is an agonist at 5-HT2C receptors and has a halflife of 14 hours. mCPP has been associated with migraine, anxiety, and
weight loss. The adverse effects of trazodone are partially mediated by α1adrenergic receptor antagonism.
Therapeutic Indications
DEPRESSIVE DISORDERS. The main indication for the use of trazodone is
MDD. There is a dose–response relationship, with dosages of 250 to 600 mg
a day being necessary for trazodone to have therapeutic benefit. Trazodone
increases total sleep time, decreases the number and the duration of nighttime
awakenings, and decreases the amount of REM sleep. Unlike tricyclic drugs,
trazodone does not decrease stage 4 sleep. Trazodone is thus useful for
depressed persons with anxiety and insomnia.
Trazodone is a first-line agent for the treatment of insomnia
because of its marked sedative qualities and favorable effects on sleep
architecture (see above) combined with its lack of anticholinergic effects.
Trazodone is effective for insomnia caused by depression or the use of drugs.
When used as a hypnotic, the usual initial dosage is 25 to 100 mg at bedtime.
INSOMNIA.

Trazodone is associated with an increased risk of
priapism. Trazodone can potentiate erections resulting from sexual
stimulation. It has thus been used to prolong erectile time and turgidity in
some men with erectile disorder. The dosage for this indication is 150 to 200
mg a day. Trazodone-triggered priapism (an erection lasting more than 3
hours with pain) is a medical emergency. The use of trazodone for the
treatment of male erectile dysfunction has diminished considerably since the
introduction of phosphodiesterase (PDE)-5 agents (see Chapter 16).
ERECTILE DISORDER.




<<<PAGE 2020>>>

OTHER INDICATIONS. Trazodone may be useful in low dosages (50 mg a day)

for controlling severe agitation in children with developmental disabilities
and elderly persons with dementia. At dosages above 250 mg a day,
trazodone reduces the tension and apprehension associated with GAD. It has
been used to treat depression in patients with schizophrenia. Trazodone may
have a beneficial effect on insomnia and nightmares in persons with PTSD.
Precautions and Adverse Reactions. The most common adverse
effects associated with trazodone are sedation, orthostatic hypotension,
dizziness, headache, and nausea. Some persons experience dry mouth or
gastric irritation. The drug is not associated with anticholinergic adverse
effects, such as urinary retention, weight gain, and constipation. A few case
reports have noted an association between trazodone and arrhythmias in
persons with preexisting premature ventricular contractions or mitral valve
prolapse. Neutropenia, usually not of clinical significance, may develop,
which should be considered if persons have a fever or sore throat.
Trazodone may cause significant orthostatic hypotension 4 to 6 hours after
a dose is taken, especially if taken concurrently with antihypertensive agents
or if a large dose is taken without food. Administration of trazodone with
food slows absorption and reduces the peak plasma concentration, thus
reducing the risk of orthostatic hypotension.
Because suicide attempts often involve the ingestion of sleeping pills, it is
essential to be familiar with the symptoms and treatment of trazodone
overdose. Patients have survived trazodone overdoses of more than 9 g.
Symptoms of overdose include lethargy, vomiting, drowsiness, headache,
orthostasis, dizziness, dyspnea, tinnitus, myalgias, tachycardia, incontinence,
shivering, and coma. Treatment consists of emesis or lavage and supportive
care. Forced diuresis may enhance elimination. Treat hypotension and
sedation as appropriate.
Trazodone causes priapism, prolonged erection in the absence of sexual
stimuli, in one of every 10,000 men. Trazodone-induced priapism usually
appears in the first 4 weeks of treatment but may occur as late as 18 months
into treatment. It can appear at any dose. In such cases, trazodone use should
be discontinued, and another antidepressant should be used. Painful erections
or erections lasting more than 1 hour are warning signs that warrant
immediate discontinuation of the drug and medical evaluation. The first step




<<<PAGE 2021>>>

in the emergency management of priapism is an intracavernosal injection of
an α1-adrenergic agonist pressor agent, such as metaraminol (Aramine) or
epinephrine. In about one-third of reported cases, surgical intervention was
required. In some cases, permanent impairment of erectile function or
impotence resulted.
The use of trazodone is contraindicated in pregnant and nursing women.
Trazodone should be used with caution in persons with hepatic and renal
diseases.
Drug Interactions. Trazodone potentiates the CNS depressant effects of
other centrally acting drugs and alcohol. Concurrent use of trazodone and
antihypertensives may cause hypotension. No cases of hypertensive crisis
have been reported when trazodone has been used to treat MAOI-associated
insomnia. Trazodone can increase levels of digoxin and phenytoin.
Trazodone should be used with caution in combination with warfarin. Drugs
that inhibit CYP3A4 can increase levels of trazodone’s primary metabolite,
mCPP, leading to an increase in side effects.
Laboratory Interferences. No known laboratory interferences are
associated with the administration of trazodone.
Dosage and Clinical Guidelines. Trazodone is available in 50-, 100-,
150-, and 300-mg tablets. Once-a-day dosing is as effective as divided dosing
and reduces daytime sedation. The usual starting dose is 50 mg before sleep.
The dosage can be increased in increments of 50 mg every 3 days if sedation
or orthostatic hypotension does not become a problem. The therapeutic range
for trazodone is 200 to 600 mg a day in divided doses. Some reports indicate
that dosages of 400 to 600 mg a day are required for maximal therapeutic
effects; other reports indicate that 250 to 400 mg a day is sufficient. The
dosage may be titrated up to 300 mg a day; then, the person can be evaluated
for the need for further dosage increases based on the presence or the absence
of signs of clinical improvement.

TRICYCLICS AND TETRACYCLICS
The observation in 1957 that imipramine (Tofranil) had antidepressant effects




<<<PAGE 2107>>>

clonic (grand mal) and complex partial (psychomotor, temporal lobe)
seizures, phenytoin is also used for the treatment of acute mania in bipolar
disorder.
Precautions and Adverse Reactions. The most common adverse
reactions reported with phenytoin therapy are usually dose-related and
include nystagmus, ataxia, slurred speech, decreased coordination, and
mental confusion. Other side effects include dizziness, insomnia, transient
nervousness, motor twitching, and headaches. There have been rare reports of
phenytoin induced dyskinesias, similar to those induced by phenothiazine and
other neuroleptic drugs. More severe side effects include thrombocytopenia,
leukopenia, agranulocytosis, and pancytopenia, with or without bone marrow
suppression.
Several reports have suggested the development of lymphadenopathy
(local or generalized), including benign lymph node hyperplasia,
pseudolymphoma, lymphoma, and Hodgkin’s disease. Prenatal exposure to
phenytoin may increase the risks for congenital malformations, and a
potentially life-threatening bleeding disorder related to decreased levels of
vitamin K–dependent clotting factors may occur in newborns exposed to
phenytoin in utero. Hyperglycemia has been reported with phenytoin use;
also, the agent may increase the serum glucose level in patients with diabetes.
Drug Interactions. Acute alcohol intake, amiodarone, chlordiazepoxide,
cimetidine, diazepam, disulfiram, estrogens, fluoxetine, H2-antagonists,
isoniazid, methylphenidate, phenothiazines, salicylates, and trazodone may
increase phenytoin serum levels. Drugs that may lower phenytoin levels
include carbamazepine, chronic alcohol abuse, and reserpine.
Laboratory Interferences. Phenytoin may decrease serum concentrations
of thyroxine. It may cause increased serum levels of glucose, alkaline
phosphatase, and γ-glutamyl transpeptidase.
Dosage and Clinical Guidelines. Patients may be started on one 100-mg
extended oral capsule three times daily, and the dosage then adjusted to suit
individual requirements. Patients may then be switched to once-a-day dosing,
which is more convenient. In this case, extended-release capsules may be




<<<PAGE 2258>>>

Diem SJ, Blackwell TL, Stone KL, Yaffe K, Haney EM. Use of
antidepressants and rates of hip bone loss in older women: the study of
osteoporotic fractures. Arch Intern Med. 2007;167:1240–1245.
Duman RS, Heninger GR, Nestler EJ. A molecular and cellular theory of
depression. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 1997;54:597–606.
Dykens JA, Jamieson JD, Marroquin LD, Nadanaciva S, Xu JJ, Dunn MC,
Smith AR, Will Y. In vitro assessment of mitochondrial dysfunction and
cytotoxicity of nefazodone, trazodone, and buspirone. Toxicol Sci.
2008;103(2):335–345.
Elkin I, Shea T, Watkins JT. NIMH treatment of depression collaborative
research program: general effectiveness of treatments. Arch Gen
Psychiatry. 1989;46:971.
Elmer LW, Bertoni JM. The increasing role of monoamine oxidase type B
inhibitors in Parkinson’s disease therapy. Expert Opin Pharmacother.
2008;9:2759–2772.
Fava M, Rush AJ, Wisniewski SR, Nierenberg AA, Alpert JE. A comparison
of mirtazapine and nortriptyline following two consecutive failed
medication treatments for depressed outpatients: a STAR*D report. Am J
Psychiatry. 2006;163(7):1161–1172.
Foley KF, DeSanty KP, Kast RE. Bupropion: pharmacology and therapeutic
applications. Expert Rev Neurother. 2006;6(9):1249–1265.
Frampton JE, Plosker GL. Duloxetine: a review of its use in the treatment of
major depressive disorder. CNS Drugs. 2007;21:581–609.
Frampton JE, Plosker GL, Masand PS. Selegiline transdermal system in the
treatment of major depressive disorder. Drugs. 2007;67:257.
Frank E, Kupfer DJ, Perel JM. Three-year outcomes for maintenance
therapies in recurrent depression. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 1990;47:1093.
Glassman AH, O’Connor CM, Califf RM, Swedberg K, Schwartz P.
Association of low bone mineral density with selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitor use by older men. Arch Intern Med. 2007;167(12):1246–1251.
Goldberg JF. A preliminary open trial of nefazodone added to mood
stabilizers for bipolar depression. J Affect Disord. 2013;144(1–2):176–178.
Goldberg JF, Thase ME. Monoamine oxidase inhibitors revisited: what you
should know. J Clin Psychiatry. 2013;74(2):189–191.
Hettema JM, Kornstein SG. Trazodone. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P,
eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed.




<<<PAGE 2263>>>

double-blind comparison of duloxetine and venlafaxine in the treatment of
patients with major depressive disorder. J Psychiatr Res. 2008;42:22–34.
Perkins KA, Karelitz JL, Jao NC, Stratton E. Possible reinforcement
enhancing effects of bupropion during initial smoking abstinence. Nicotine
Tob Res. 2013;15(6):
1141–1145.
Posternak M, Novak S, Stern A, Hennessey J, Joffe A. A pilot effectiveness
study: placebo-controlled trial of adjunctive L-triiodothyronine (T3) used
to accelerate and potentiate the antidepressant response. Int J
Neuropsychopharmacol. 2008;11(1):15–25.
Reeves RR, Ladner ME. Additional evidence of the abuse potential of
bupropion. J Clin Pharmacol. 2013;33(4):584–585.
Roose S, Laghrissi-Thode F, Kennedy JS, Nelson JC, Bigger JT. A
comparison of paroxetine and nortriptyline in depressed patients with
ischemic heart disease. JAMA. 1998;279:287–91.
Rynn M, Russell J, Erickson J, Detke MJ, Ball S. Efficacy and safety of
duloxetine in the treatment of generalized anxiety disorder: a flexible-dose,
progressive-titration, placebo-controlled trial. Depress
Anxiety.
2008;25:182–189.
Salahudeen MS, Wright C M, Peterson GM. “Esketamine: new hope for the
treatment of treatment-resistant depression? A narrative review.” Ther Adv
Drug
Saf.
2020;11:
2042098620937899.
https://doi.org/10.1177/2042098620937899.
Salsali M, Holt A, Baker GB. Inhibitory effects of the monoamine oxidase
inhibitor tranylcypromine on the cytochrome P450 enzymes CYP2C19,
CYP2C6, and CYP2D6. Cell Mol Neurobiol. 2004;24:63–76.
Sasada K, Iwamoto K, Kawano N, Kohmura K, Yamamoto M, Aleksic B,
Ebe K, Noda Y, Ozaki N. Effects of repeated dosing with mirtazapine,
trazodone, or placebo on driving performance and cognitive function in
healthy volunteers. Hum Psychopharmacol. 2013;28(3):281–286.
Scarff JR. “Use of Brexanolone for Postpartum Depression.” Innov Clin
Neurosci. 2019;16(11–12):32–35.
Schatzberg AF, Kremer C, Rodrigues HE, Murphy GM Jr. Double-blind,
randomized comparison of mirtazapine and paroxetine in elderly depressed
patients. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2002;10:541–550.




<<<PAGE 3638>>>

psychology of, 397–398
psychotherapies for, 392t
recurrent brief, 384
treatment approach, 387–393
Depressive disorders, in children, 174–179
bereavement and, 176
course and prognosis, 176–177
differential diagnosis, 176
epidemiology, 179
etiology, 179
major depressive disorder, 175
pathology and laboratory examination, 176
persistent depressive disorder, 175–176
treatment, 177–179
duration of, 178–179
electroconvulsive therapy, 179
evidence-based treatment studies, 177
FDA warning and suicidality, 178
pharmacotherapy, 178
psychiatric hospitalization, 177
psychosocial interventions, 177–178
Depressive episodes, in bipolar disorder, 366, 366t
Depressive hallucinations, 175
Depressive personality, 567
Derailment, 10t
Derealization, 10, 172
Desensitization, 772
Desmopressin, for enuresis, 484
Desvenlafaxine
dosage and administration, 634
drug interactions, 634
precautions and adverse reactions, 633
therapeutic indications, 633
Desyrel. See Trazodone
Development, 883
adolescence, 898–904
infants, 887–893




<<<PAGE 3759>>>

variants, 1069t–1070t
Transforming growth factor-α (TGF-α), 945
Transgender, 547
Transient disinhibition syndromes, 742
Transient global amnesia, 247, 440. See also Dissociative amnesia
Transient ischemic attacks (TIAs), 236
Transitions, during psychiatric interview, 15
Transporters, 959
Trauma affect regulation: Guide for education and therapy (TARGET),
173
Trauma-and stressor-related disorders, 433
differential diagnosis for, 433
PTSD and acute stress disorder, 433
Trauma- and stressor- related disorders, in children, 167
disinhibited social engagement disorder, 167–172
posttraumatic stress disorder, 172–174
reactive attachment disorder, 167–171
Trauma-focused cognitive-behavioral therapy (TFCBT), 435
The Trauma of the Birth (Rank), 1087
Traumatic bereavement, 851
Traumatic brain injury (TBI)
mild, 50–51
neuropsychological testing for, 50
Traumatic infantilism, 445
Trazodone, 638
dosage and clinical guidelines, 640
drug interactions, 640
pharmacologic actions, 639
precautions and adverse reactions, 640
therapeutic indications, 639
Treatment and Education of Autistic and Communication- related
Handicapped Children (TEACCH), 128
Treatment duration, 602–603
Treatment failure, 603–604
Treatment of Adolescent Depression Study (TADS), 174, 177
Treatment of SSRI-Resistant Depression in Adolescents (TORDIA), 177,
179


