<<<PAGE 217>>>

out the possibility of a seizure disorder.
Evoked Potential. Evoked potential (EP) testing is the measurement of the
EEG response to specific sensory stimulation. The stimulation may be visual,
auditory, or somatosensory. During visual EPs, the patient is exposed to
flashing lights or a checkerboard pattern. With auditory EP, the patient hears
a specific tone. In somatosensory EP, the patient experiences an electrical
stimulation to an extremity. These stimuli repeatedly occur while the patient
undergoes a routine EEG. Using a computer, the responses to these stimuli
are recorded and averaged. The time frame is measured in milliseconds.
These tests are useful in neurology and neurosurgery. For example, they
assist in the assessment of demyelinating disorders such as multiple sclerosis
(MS). In psychiatry, EP testing may help in the differentiation of organic
from functional impairments. A classical example is the use of EP testing to
evaluate possible hysterical blindness. The usefulness of these tests in
psychiatry is still under investigation.
Polysomnography. Polysomnography is used to assess disorders of sleep
by concurrently assessing the EEG, ECG, blood oxygen saturation,
respiration, body temperature, electromyogram, and electrooculogram.
Polysomnography has demonstrated an increase in the overall amount of
rapid eye movement (REM) sleep and a shortened period before the onset of
REM sleep (decreased REM latency) in patients with major depression.
These studies may assist in differentiating depression from other conditions
that mimic depression. For example, patients who appear depressed from
dementia do not have decreased REM latency or an increase in the amount of
REM sleep.
Electrocardiogram
The ECG is a graphical representation of the electrical activity of the heart.
Abnormalities in this activity correlate with cardiac pathology. The ECG is
most commonly used in psychiatry to assess the side effects of psychotropic
medications.
Ziprasidone has been associated with a dose-related prolongation of the
QTc interval. There is a known association of fatal arrhythmias (e.g., torsades
de pointes) with QTc prolongation from some other medications. For this




<<<PAGE 218>>>

reason, clinicians usually obtain an ECG before initiation of treatment with
ziprasidone. Ziprasidone is contraindicated in patients with a known history
of QTc prolongation (including congenital long QT syndrome), with recent
acute myocardial infarction, or with uncompensated heart failure.
Bradycardia, hypokalemia or hypomagnesemia, or the concurrent use of other
drugs that prolong the QTc interval all increase the risk of severe
arrhythmias. Ziprasidone should be discontinued in patients who have
persistent QTc measurements greater than 500 milliseconds.
Like ziprasidone, thioridazine has been associated with prolongation of the
QTc interval in a dose-related manner. Prolongation of the QTc interval has
been associated with torsades de pointes arrhythmias and sudden death. An
ECG should be obtained before initiating treatment with thioridazine to rule
out QTc prolongation. Many other antipsychotics can along prolong the QTc
interval particularly in patients with preexisting arrhythmia.
TCAs are, at times, associated with ECG changes. Anticholinergic effects
may increase heart rate. Prolongation of the PR, QT, and QRS intervals,
along with ST-segment and T-wave abnormalities, may occur. The TCAs can
cause or increase preexisting atrioventricular or bundle branch block. When
the QTc exceeds 0.440 seconds, a patient is at an increased risk for sudden
death due to cardiac arrhythmias. Many clinicians obtain an ECG before
beginning a TCA in a patient older than 40 years of age and any patient with
known cardiovascular disease.
Lithium therapy can cause benign reversible T-wave changes, which can
impair sinoatrial (SA) node function and can cause heart block. ECGs are
often obtained before initiation of treatment with lithium and in cases of
lithium toxicity or overdose.
Psychiatrists, when treating patients with specific psychiatric diagnoses,
also use the ECG. Eating disorder patients commonly have low potassium
levels that may result in abnormal ECG recordings. As the serum potassium
drops below normal, T waves become flat (or inverted), and U waves may
appear.
Holter Monitoring. Holter monitoring is the continuous recording of a
patient’s ECG activity for a sustained period (e.g., 24 hours). Patients are
ambulatory during this time. It is useful for the evaluation of dizziness,
palpitations, and syncope. It is commonly used in the evaluation of patients




<<<PAGE 415>>>

during clozapine use. Its use is generally limited to treatment-resistant
psychotic patients.
Ziprasidone has receptor-blocking properties at the 5-HT2A and D2
receptor sites and carries little risk of extrapyramidal and antihistaminic
effects. No guidelines exist for its use in autistic children with aggressive and
self-injurious behaviors; clinicians sometimes use it to treat these behaviors
in treatment-resistant children. In studies of its use in adults with
schizophrenia, dose ranges of 40 to 160 mg were effective. Adverse effects
include sedation, dizziness, and lightheadedness. Before using this
medication, the clinician should check an electrocardiogram.
Lithium is efficacious in children with aggression without autism spectrum
disorder, and it is used clinically in the treatment of aggressive or selfinjurious behaviors when antipsychotic medications are not helpful.
Agents Used for Behavioral Impairment in Autism Spectrum
Disorder without Evidence of Efficacy. A double-blind study
investigated the efficacy of amantadine, which blocks N-methyl-D-aspartate
(NMDA) receptors, in the treatment of behavioral disturbance, such as
irritability, aggression, and hyperactivity, in children with autism. Some
researchers have suggested that abnormalities of the glutamatergic system
may contribute to the emergence of autism spectrum disorders. High
glutamate levels occur in children with the formerly labeled Rett syndrome.
In the amantadine study, 47 percent of children on amantadine were
“improved” per their parents, and 37 percent of children on placebo were
rated “improved” by parents in irritability and hyperactivity, although this
difference was not statistically significant. Investigators rated the children on
amantadine “significantly improved” for hyperactivity. A double-blind,
placebo-controlled study of the efficacy of the anticonvulsant lamotrigine on
hyperactivity in children with autism showed high rates of placebo
improvement in ratings of hyperactivity, which were similar to response on
the medication.
Clomipramine is sometimes used but lacks RCTs to provide evidence of
positive results. Fenfluramine, which reduces blood serotonin levels, has also
been used but appears to be ineffective. Improvement does not seem to be
associated with a reduction in blood serotonin levels. Naltrexone, an opioid




<<<PAGE 512>>>

agonist and a 5-HT2A antagonist. A multisite double-blind controlled study of
aripiprazole in children with Tourette disorder in China found a reduction in
tic behaviors in about 60 percent of the aripiprazole group compared to about
64 percent reduction in a group treated with tiapride, a benzamide with
selective D2 receptor antagonism. There was no significant difference
between the two groups. Although sedation and sleep disturbance are
common side effects with aripiprazole, weight gain is less pronounced than
with risperidone.
Olanzapine and ziprasidone are also efficacious in the treatment of tic
disorders in at least one RCT. Sedation and weight gain were prominent side
effects with olanzapine, and potential QT prolongation was an issue with
ziprasidone. Quetiapine is a potentially useful agent in the treatment of tics,
with its higher affinity for 5-HT2 receptors than for D2 receptors. However,
randomized clinical trials are needed. Clozapine, contrary to many other
atypical antipsychotics, is not useful in the treatment of tics.
NORADRENERGIC AGENTS.

Noradrenergic agents, including clonidine and
guanfacine, as well as atomoxetine, are frequently used in children as primary
treatments or adjunctive treatments for comorbid ADHD and tics. Several
studies have provided some evidence for the efficacy of clonidine, an α2adrenergic agent, in the treatment of tics in children, adolescents, and adults
with tic disorders. The largest randomized trial with oral clonidine compared
to placebo found a modest reduction in tics with clonidine. A multisite
randomized, double-blind placebo-controlled trial using the clonidine patch
in the treatment of tic disorders in children found a significant improvement
in tic symptoms (about 69 percent) compared to about 47 percent of the
children in the control group. The usual dose range for clonidine is from 0.05
mg orally three times daily to 0.1 mg four times daily, and for guanfacine, it
is from 1 to 4 mg/day. When used in these dosage ranges, adverse effects of
the α-adrenergic agents may include drowsiness, headache, irritability, and
occasional hypotension.
Guanfacine can treat children with ADHD successfully, although its
efficacy regarding reducing tics is controversial. In one randomized clinical
trial treating 34 children with ADHD and tics, guanfacine was superior to
placebo in the reduction of tics. In another double-blind placebo-controlled




<<<PAGE 552>>>

controlled study of sertraline to prevent PTSD found that children who
received sertraline, flexibly dosed between 25 and 150 mg/day, had a
decrease in parent-reported symptoms of PTSD over 8 weeks compared to a
placebo group. Among the child-reported symptoms, however, there was no
significant difference between the two groups.
Psychiatrists sometimes use antiadrenergic agents to treat dysregulation of
the noradrenergic system in adults and youth with PTSD. α2-Agonists such as
clonidine and guanfacine, for example, have been used to decrease
norepinephrine release, whereas centrally acting β-antagonists such as
propranolol, and α1-antagonists such as prazosin, are hypothesized to
improve hyperarousal and intrusive thoughts through attenuation of
norepinephrine postsynaptically. Although there are some data in adults with
PTSD to support the use of these agents, there are mainly case reports for
youths. There is a suggestion that guanfacine may reduce nightmares in
children with PTSD and that clonidine may diminish symptoms of
reenactment of traumatic events in children. One report of propranolol
treatment in 11 pediatric patients with PTSD from sexual or physical abuse
with a mean age of 8.5 years, who exhibited agitation and hyperarousal,
indicated some decrease in symptoms in 8 of the 11 children studied. Another
open study of transdermal clonidine treatment of preschoolers with PTSD
suggests that clonidine may be efficacious in this population in decreasing
activation and hyperarousal. An additional open trial of oral clonidine with
dosage ranges of 0.05 to 0.1 mg twice daily similarly suggests that this
medication may provide some relief for the symptoms of hyperarousal,
impulsivity, and agitation in young children with PTSD.
Second-generation antipsychotics such as risperidone, olanzapine,
quetiapine, ziprasidone, and aripiprazole have been studied in adults with
PTSD with mixed results. Risperidone and aripiprazole both have FDA
approval for use in children and adolescents with aggression, severe
behavioral dyscontrol, and severe psychiatric disorders; however, there are no
controlled trials with children with PTSD. For example, there is one case
series of three preschool-age children who exhibited symptoms of acute
stress disorder and who had severe thermal burns improved after being
treated with risperidone.
In children and adolescents with PTSD, there is one open-label trial of




<<<PAGE 582>>>

presence of lifetime psychosis, and bipolar disorder not otherwise specified
diagnosis. Over the follow-up period, about 20 percent of subjects with
bipolar II disorder converted to bipolar I disorder, and 25 percent of the
bipolar disorder not otherwise specified subjects developed bipolar I disorder
or bipolar II disorder during the follow-up period.
Similar to the natural history of bipolar disorders in adults, children have a
wide range of symptom severity in manic and depressed episodes. The more
frequent diagnostic conversions from bipolar II disorder to bipolar I disorder
among children and adolescents, compared with adults, highlight the lack of
stability of the bipolar II disorder diagnosis in youth. This is also the case
concerning conversion from bipolar disorder not otherwise specified to other
bipolar disorders. When bipolar disorder occurs in young children, recovery
rates are lower. Also, there is a higher likelihood mixed states and rapid
cycling, and higher rates of polarity changes compared with those who
develop bipolar disorders in late adolescence or early adulthood.

TREATMENT
Treatment of early-onset bipolar disorder incorporates multimodal
interventions including pharmacotherapy, psychoeducation, psychosocial
intervention with the family and the child, and school interventions to
optimize a child’s school adjustment and achievement.
Pharmacotherapy
Two classes of medications—atypical antipsychotics and mood-stabilizing
agents—are the most well-studied agents that provide efficacy in the
treatment of early-onset bipolar disorders. Eight RCTs have shown the
efficacy of atypical antipsychotic agents in the treatment of bipolar disorder
in youth between the ages of 10 and 17 years. These studies compared an
atypical antipsychotic to placebo, or compared an atypical antipsychotic to a
mood stabilizer, or added an antipsychotic to a mood-stabilizing agent. The
atypical antipsychotics included olanzapine, quetiapine, risperidone,
aripiprazole, and ziprasidone. All five of the atypical antipsychotic studies
demonstrated significant efficacy in the treatment of early-onset bipolar
manic or mixed states. A recent trial comparing quetiapine and valproate
found that both were efficacious, but the quetiapine was superior in the speed




<<<PAGE 746>>>

Electroencephalogram
Chest radiograph
Blood and urine drug screens
Additional tests when indicated
Blood, urine, and cerebrospinal fluid cultures
B12, folic acid concentrations
Computed tomography or magnetic resonance imaging brain scan
Lumbar puncture and CSF examination
Agitation is a poorly defined symptom that can range from distressed
anxiety to physical aggression. Because of the ambiguity of the term,
agitation is challenging to study. However, some scales are available to aid
research, such as the Richmond Agitation-Sedation Scale. Many medications
have anecdotal support. However, studies on the pharmacologic treatment of
agitation in delirium are disappointing. The antipsychotics are most
commonly used. The approach is analogous to the above approach for
psychosis in delirium, with adjustments for the severity and prolongation of
the delirium. Sodium valproate given IV may be useful when antipsychotics
fail. For severe agitation, dexmedetomidine, an α2-adrenoreceptor agonist
that is used as a sedative, can help sedate a patient, mainly a mechanically
ventilated patient, without the deliriogenic effects of many other sedatives.
Second-generation antipsychotics, such as risperidone, clozapine,
olanzapine, quetiapine, ziprasidone, and aripiprazole, may be considered for
delirium management, but clinical trial experience with these agents for
delirium is limited. Ziprasidone appears to have an activating effect and may
not be appropriate in delirium management. Olanzapine is available for
intramuscular (IM) use and as a rapidly disintegrating oral preparation. These
routes of administration may be preferable for some patients with delirium
who are poorly compliant with medications or who are too sedated to
swallow medications safely.
Insomnia is difficult to treat. Benzodiazepines might be helpful; however,
they risk worsening a patient’s confusion. Also, there is no conclusive
evidence to support the use of benzodiazepines in non–alcohol-related
delirium. If pain is the cause, a physician should not hesitate to prescribe




<<<PAGE 1138>>>

derangements.
EXTRAPYRAMIDAL SIDE EFFECTS. Most first-generation antipsychotics cause

extrapyramidal side effects, including parkinsonian symptoms, dystonias, and
akathisia. Although less common in second-generation antipsychotics,
extrapyramidal effects can still occur.
Clinicians have several alternatives for treating these side effects. These
include reducing the dose of the antipsychotic, adding an antiparkinson
medication, and changing the patient to a medication that is less likely to
cause extrapyramidal side effects. The most effective antiparkinson
medications are anticholinergic antiparkinson drugs. However, these
medications have additional side effects, including dry mouth, constipation,
blurred vision, and, often, memory loss. Also, these medications are often
only partially effective, leaving patients with substantial amounts of lingering
extrapyramidal side effects. Centrally acting β-blockers, such as propranolol,
may help treat akathisia. Most patients respond to dosages between 30 and 90
mg per day.
If prescribing conventional antipsychotics, clinicians may consider
prescribing prophylactic antiparkinson medications for patients who are
likely to experience disturbing extrapyramidal side effects. These include
patients who have a history of extrapyramidal side effect sensitivity and those
treated with relatively high doses of high-potency drugs. Prophylactic
antiparkinson medications may help when prescribing high-potency drugs for
young men, who tend to have an increased vulnerability for developing
dystonias. Again, these patients should be candidates for newer drugs.
Some individuals are highly sensitive to extrapyramidal side effects at the
dose that is necessary to control their psychosis. For many of these patients,
medication side effects may seem worse than the illness itself. These patients
should be treated routinely with a medication less likely to cause
extrapyramidal side effects. Risperidone may cause extrapyramidal side
effects even at low doses—for example, 0.5 mg—but the severity and risk are
increased at higher doses—for example, more than 6 mg. Olanzapine and
ziprasidone are also associated with dose-related parkinsonism and akathisia.
About 20 to 30 percent of patients on long-term
treatment with a first-generation antipsychotic will exhibit symptoms of
TARDIVE DYSKINESIA.




<<<PAGE 1201>>>

skin rash. Evidence for valproate and other anticonvulsants is limited.
Gabapentin and levetiracetam appear to be ineffective.
Antipsychotics. Several of the atypical antipsychotics have shown efficacy
for bipolar depression. Quetiapine has the best evidence. It appears that
quetiapine, in a modest dose (300 mg/day), is sufficient to improve
symptoms. Olanzapine, lurasidone, and cariprazine also have positive studies,
and the FDA approved lurasidone for this indication. Ziprasidone and
aripiprazole do not appear to be effective.
Antidepressants. It remains controversial whether antidepressants are useful
for the depressive phase of bipolar disorder. This is particularly true in
patients with rapid cycling and mixed states. They seem to be less effective
than for major depressive disorder and may induce cycling, mania, or
hypomania. The risk of inducing mania seems highest for tricyclic
antidepressants, monoamine oxidase inhibitors, and perhaps the serotonin
norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors such as venlafaxine. Most experts agree
that antidepressants are not appropriate as monotherapy for patients with
bipolar disorder.
Whether we can use them as adjuncts is also controversial. Some
antidepressants have some evidence of efficacy for adjunctive therapy, such
as fluoxetine. On the whole, the available evidence suggests they may have
some usefulness when combined with a mood stabilizer.




<<<PAGE 1434>>>

medication response is likely to be partial, devising the best “shock-absorber”
system for the patient at a given time. In general, success is more likely if the
target symptoms are present across most or all personality states, rather than
confined to one or a few. Because rapid symptom oscillations are
characteristic in this population, it is not advisable to chase each symptom
shift with a medication change.
The most robust medication treatment effect in this patient population is
the response of nightmares to the α1-adrenergic antagonist prazosin. If the
patient tolerates the blood pressure effects, dosages of prazosin as high as 25
mg daily, in single or twice-daily doses, can be useful. Daytime dosing may
also be effective for control of flashbacks and intrusive symptoms.
Doxazosin, a longer-acting α1-adrenergic antagonist, may also help with
nightmares and intrusive symptoms in PTSD.
Antidepressant medications can reduce depression and stabilize mood. A
variety of PTSD symptoms, especially intrusive and hyperarousal symptoms,
are partially medication responsive. Clinicians report some success with
SSRI, tricyclic, and monoamine oxidase (MAO) antidepressants, β-blockers,
clonidine, anticonvulsants, and benzodiazepines in reducing intrusive
symptoms, hyperarousal, and anxiety in patients with a dissociative identity
disorder. Patients with obsessive-compulsive symptoms may respond to
serotonergic antidepressants. Emerging data suggest that naltrexone may help
ameliorate recurrent self-injurious behaviors in a subset of traumatized
patients.
The atypical neuroleptics, such as risperidone, quetiapine, ziprasidone,
aripiprazole, and olanzapine, may be more effective and better tolerated than
typical neuroleptics for overwhelming anxiety and intrusive PTSD symptoms
in patients with dissociative identity disorder. However, weight gain and
metabolic syndrome may be a particularly problematic side effect for these
nonpsychotic patients. Occasionally, an extremely disorganized,
overwhelmed, chronically ill patient with dissociative identity disorder, who
has not responded to trials of other neuroleptics, responds favorably to a trial
of clozapine.
Electroconvulsive Therapy. For some patients, ECT helps to ameliorate
refractory mood disorders and does not worsen dissociative memory




<<<PAGE 1816>>>

(riluzole,
memantine)
Acute and severe

Mirtazapine, Novel
Psychotropics
(quetiapine,
aripiprazole,
clozapine), TCAs,
clonazepam,
valproates, lithium

Depression
Atypical
MAOIs, SSRIs,
depression/dysphoria
SNRIs,
Classical depression
Aripiprazole,
Lurasidone,
ziprasidone,
quetiapine,
Atypical
antipsychotics (as
monotherapy or
augmentation)

TCAs

Emotional lability/rapid Lithium, Lamotrigine,
cycling
Valproate, Lowerdose
antipsychotics
(olanzapine,
aripiprazole,
clozapine,
ziprasidone)

TCAs
(“catecholamine
stress”),
Standard
antidepressants
(risk of switching
to mania)

II. Behavior Dyscontrol
Aggression/impulsivity
Affective aggression
Lithium, SSRIs,
“Hot temper” with normal
Anticonvulsants,

Benzodiazepines
(disinhibition)




<<<PAGE 1902>>>

Cognitive Impairment. Cognitive impairment means a disturbance in the
capacity to think. Some agents, such as the benzodiazepine agonists, are
recognized as causes of cognitive impairment. Other widely used
psychotropics, such as the SSRIs, lamotrigine (Lamictal), topiramate
(Topamax), gabapentin (Neurontin), lithium, TCAs, and bupropion, however,
are also associated with varying degrees of memory impairment and wordfinding difficulties. In contrast to the benzodiazepine-induced anterograde
amnesia, these agents cause a more subtle type of absent-mindedness. Drugs
with anticholinergic properties are likely to worsen memory performance.
Sweating. Severe perspiration unrelated to ambient temperature is
associated with TCAs, SSRIs, and venlafaxine. This side effect is often
socially disabling. Attempts can be made to treat this side effect with alpha
agents, such as terazosin (Hytrin) and oxybutynin (Ditropan).
Cardiovascular Disturbances. Newer agents are less likely to have
direct cardiac effects. Many older agents, such as TCAs and phenothiazines,
affected BP and cardiac conduction. Thioridazine (Mellaril), which has been
in use for decades, has been shown to prolong the QTc interval in a doserelated manner and may increase the risk of sudden death by delaying
ventricular repolarization and causing torsades de pointes. Newer drugs are
now routinely scrutinized for evidence of cardiac effects. A promising
treatment for psychosis, sertindole (Serlect), was not marketed because the
FDA would have required a black box warning. Slight QTc effects noted with
ziprasidone (Geodon) delayed the marketing of that drug. Clozapine can
cause myocarditis in rare cases.
Rash. Any medication is a potential source of a drug rash. Some
psychotropics, such as carbamazepine (Equetro, Tegretol) and lamotrigine,
have been linked to an increased risk of severe exfoliative dermatitis.
Commonly referred to as Stevens–Johnson syndrome, this condition is a
systemic, immune-mediated reaction that can prove fatal or result in
permanent scarring or blindness. All patients should be informed about the
potential seriousness of widespread lesions that occur above the neck, that
involve the mucous membranes, and that may be associated with fever and




<<<PAGE 1927>>>

now more commonly used than the “typical” antipsychotics. In contrast to the
earlier antipsychotic drugs, the SGAs have significant effects on both the
dopamine and serotonin systems. Their pharmacology is complex, with
individual drugs in this group having multiple neurotransmitter effects. All
SGAs are indicated for the treatment of schizophrenia. Most of these SGA
drugs have also received approval as monotherapy or adjunctive therapy in
the treatment of bipolar disorder. Some have also been approved as adjuncts
for the treatment of major depression.
As of 2020, 13 SGA drugs were approved by the FDA. These include the
following:
Aripiprazole (marketed as Abilify)
Asenapine Maleate (marketed as Saphris)
Brexpiprazole (marketed as Rexulti)
Cariprazine (marketed as Vraylar)
Clozapine (marketed as Clozaril)
Iloperidone (marketed as Fanapt)
Lumateperone (marketed as Caplyta)
Lurasidone (marketed as Latuda)
Olanzapine (marketed as Zyprexa, and as Symbyax in combination with
fluoxetine)
Paliperidone (marketed as Invega)
Quetiapine (marketed as Seroquel)
Risperidone (marketed as Risperdal)
Ziprasidone (marketed as Geodon)
It is arguable whether the SGAs represent an improvement in overall
tolerability than the DRAs. Although there is an improvement concerning a
lowered, not absent, risk of EPS, most of the drugs in this group often
produce substantial weight gain, which in turn increases the potential for the
development of diabetes mellitus. Olanzapine and clozapine appear to
account for most cases of weight gain and drug-induced diabetes mellitus.
The other agents pose a smaller risk of these side effects; nevertheless, the
FDA has requested that all SGAs carry a warning label that patients taking
the drugs need to be monitored closely, and has recommended the following
factors be considered for all patients prescribed SGAs:




<<<PAGE 1937>>>

drugs have been well studied. Phenytoin increases quetiapine clearance
fivefold; no significant pharmacokinetic interactions have been noted. Avoid
the use of quetiapine with drugs that increase the QT interval and in patients
with risk factors for prolonged QT interval. The FDA has added a new
warning about quetiapine, cautioning prescribers about potential prolongation
of the QT interval when above-recommended amounts of quetiapine are
combined with specific drugs. Quetiapine should not be combined with other
drugs that are known to prolong QTc. This includes class 1A antiarrhythmics
(e.g., quinidine, procainamide) or class III antiarrhythmics (e.g., amiodarone,
sotalol), antipsychotic medications (e.g., ziprasidone, chlorpromazine,
thioridazine), antibiotics (e.g., gatifloxacin, moxifloxacin), or any other class
of medications known to prolong the QTc interval (e.g., pentamidine,
levomethadyl acetate, methadone). Quetiapine should also be avoided in
circumstances that may increase the risk of occurrence of torsade de pointes
or sudden death, including (1) a history of cardiac arrhythmias such as
bradycardia; (2) hypokalemia or hypomagnesemia; (3) concomitant use of
other drugs that prolong the QTc interval; and (4) presence of congenital
prolongation of the QT interval. Postmarketing cases also show increases in
QT interval in patients who overdose on quetiapine.
Side Effects. Somnolence, postural hypotension, and dizziness are the most
common adverse effects of quetiapine. These are usually transient and are
best managed with initial gradual upward titration of the dosage. Quetiapine
is the SDA least likely to cause EPS, regardless of dose. This makes it
particularly useful in treating patients with Parkinson disease who develop
dopamine agonist-induced psychosis. Prolactin elevation is rare and both
transient and mild when it occurs. Quetiapine is associated with modest
transient weight gain in some persons, but some patients occasionally gain a
considerable amount of weight. The relationship between quetiapine and the
development of diabetes is not as clearly established as are the cases
involving the use of olanzapine. Small increases in heart rate, constipation,
and a transient increase in liver transaminases may also occur. Initial
concerns about cataract formation, based on animal studies, have not been
borne out since the drug has been in clinical use. Nevertheless, it might be
prudent to test for lens abnormalities early in treatment and periodically after
that.




<<<PAGE 1938>>>

Ziprasidone (Geodon)
Indications. Ziprasidone is indicated for the treatment of schizophrenia.
Ziprasidone is also indicated as monotherapy for the acute treatment of manic
or mixed episodes associated with bipolar I disorder and as an adjunct to
lithium or valproate for the maintenance treatment of bipolar I disorder.
Pharmacology. Ziprasidone is a benzisothiazole piperazine. Peak plasma
concentrations of ziprasidone are reached in 2 to 6 hours. Steady-state levels
ranging from 5 to 10 hours are reached between the first and the third days of
treatment. The mean terminal half-life at steady state ranges from 5 to 10
hours, which accounts for the recommendation that twice-daily dosing is
necessary. Bioavailability doubles when ziprasidone is taken with food, and
therefore it should be taken with food.
Peak serum concentrations of IM ziprasidone occur after approximately 1
hour, with a half-life of 2 to 5 hours.
Ziprasidone, similar to the other SDAs, blocks 5-HT2A and D2 receptors. It
is also an antagonist of 5-HT1D, 5-HT2C, D3, D4, α1, and H1 receptors. It has
a very low affinity for D1, M1, and α2 receptors. Also, ziprasidone has agonist
activity at the serotonin 5-HT1A receptors and is an SSRI and a
norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor. This action is consistent with clinical
reports that ziprasidone has antidepressant-like effects in nonschizophrenic
patients.
Dosages. Ziprasidone is available in 20-, 40-, 60-, and 80-mg capsules.
Ziprasidone for IM use comes as a single-use 20 mg/mL vial. Oral
ziprasidone dosing should be initiated at 40 mg a day, divided into two daily
doses. Studies have shown efficacy in the range of 80 to 160 mg a day,
divided twice daily. In clinical practice, doses as high as 240 mg a day are
being used. The recommended IM dosage is 10 to 20 mg every 2 hours for
the 10-mg dose and every 4 hours for the 20-mg dose. The maximum total
daily dose of IM ziprasidone is 40 mg.
Other than interactions with other drugs that prolong the QTc complex,
ziprasidone appears to have a low potential for clinically significant drug
interactions.




<<<PAGE 1939>>>

Side Effects. Somnolence, headache, dizziness, nausea, and
lightheadedness are the most common adverse effects in patients taking
ziprasidone. The drug has almost no significant effects outside the CNS, is
associated with almost no weight gain, and does not cause sustained prolactin
elevation. Concerns about prolongation of the QTc complex have deterred
some clinicians from using ziprasidone as a first choice. The QTc interval has
been shown to increase in patients treated with 40 and 120 mg/day.
Ziprasidone is contraindicated in combination with other drugs known to
prolong the QTc interval. These include, but are not limited to, dofetilide,
sotalol, quinidine, other class IA and III antiarrhythmics, mesoridazine,
thioridazine,
chlorpromazine,
droperidol,
pimozide,
sparfloxacin,
gatifloxacin, moxifloxacin, halofantrine, mefloquine, pentamidine, arsenic
trioxide, levomethadyl acetate, dolasetron mesylate, probucol, and
tacrolimus. Ziprasidone should be avoided in patients with congenital long
QT syndrome and patients with a history of cardiac arrhythmias.
Aripiprazole (Abilify)
Aripiprazole is a potent 5-HT2A antagonist and is indicated for the treatment
of both schizophrenia and acute mania. It is also approved for the
augmentation of antidepressant agents in MDD. Aripiprazole is a D2
antagonist, but can also act as a partial D2 agonist. Partial D2 agonists
compete at D2 receptors for endogenous dopamine, thereby producing a
functional reduction of dopamine activity.
Indications. Aripiprazole is indicated for the treatment of schizophrenia.
Short-term, 4- to 6-week studies comparing aripiprazole with haloperidol and
risperidone in patients with schizophrenia and schizoaffective disorder have
shown comparable efficacy. Dosages of 15, 20, and 30 mg a day were found
to be effective. Long-term studies suggest that aripiprazole is effective as a
maintenance treatment at a daily dose of 15 to 30 mg.
Aripiprazole is also indicated for the acute and maintenance treatment of
manic and mixed episodes associated with bipolar I disorder. It is also used
as adjunctive therapy to either lithium or valproate for the acute treatment of
manic and mixed episodes associated with bipolar I disorder.
Aripiprazole is indicated for use as adjunctive therapy to antidepressants




<<<PAGE 1949>>>

of blood glucose, lipids, and body weight is recommended.
Although the transition from a DRA to an SDA may be made abruptly, it is
wiser to taper off the DRA slowly while titrating up the SDA. Clozapine and
olanzapine both have anticholinergic effects, and the transition from one to
the other can usually be accomplished with little risk of cholinergic rebound.
The transition from risperidone to olanzapine is best accomplished by
tapering the risperidone off over 3 weeks while simultaneously beginning
olanzapine at 10 mg a day. Risperidone, quetiapine, and ziprasidone lack
anticholinergic effects, and the abrupt transition from a DRA, olanzapine, or
clozapine to one of these agents may cause cholinergic rebound, which
consists of excessive salivation, nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea. The risk of
cholinergic rebound can be mitigated by initially augmenting risperidone,
quetiapine, or ziprasidone with an anticholinergic drug, which is then tapered
off slowly. Any initiation and termination of SDA use should be
accomplished gradually.
It is wise to overlap the administration of the new drug with the old drug.
Of interest, some people have a more robust clinical response while taking
the two agents during the transition and then regressing on monotherapy with
the newer drug. We know little about the safety of combination antipsychotic
treatment.
Persons receiving regular injections of depot formulations of a DRA who
are to switch to SDA use are given the first dose of the SDA on the day the
next injection is due.
Persons who developed agranulocytosis while taking clozapine can safely
switch to olanzapine use, although initiation of olanzapine use amid
clozapine-induced agranulocytosis can prolong the time of recovery from the
usual 3 to 4 days up to 11 to 12 days. It is prudent to wait for the resolution of
agranulocytosis before initiating olanzapine use. Emergence or recurrence of
agranulocytosis has not been reported with olanzapine, even in persons who
developed it while taking clozapine.
SDA use by pregnant women has not been studied, but consideration
should be given to the potential of risperidone to raise prolactin
concentrations, sometimes up to three to four times the upper limit of the
normal range. Because the drugs can be excreted in breast milk, they should
not be taken by nursing mothers. The dosages for selected SDAs are given in
Table 21-9.




<<<PAGE 2063>>>

The coadministration of lithium and carbamazepine, lamotrigine,
valproate, and clonazepam may increase lithium concentrations and
aggravate lithium-induced neurologic adverse effects. Treatment with the
combination should be initiated at slightly lower dosages than usual, and the
dosages should be increased gradually. Changes from one to another
treatment for mania should be made carefully, with as little temporal overlap
between the drugs as possible.
Most diuretics (e.g., thiazide and potassium-sparing) can increase lithium
concentrations; when treatment with such a diuretic is stopped, the clinician
may need to increase the person’s daily lithium dosage. Osmotic and loop
diuretics, carbonic anhydrase inhibitors, and xanthines (including caffeine)
may reduce lithium concentrations to below therapeutic concentrations.
Whereas ACEIs may cause an increase in lithium concentrations, the AT1
angiotensin II receptor inhibitors losartan (Cozaar) and irbesartan (Avapro)
do not alter lithium concentrations. A wide range of NSAIDs can decrease
lithium clearance, thereby increasing lithium concentrations. These drugs
include indomethacin (Indocin), phenylbutazone (Azolid), diclofenac
(Voltaren), ketoprofen (Orudis), oxyphenbutazone (Oxalid), ibuprofen
(Motrin, Advil), piroxicam (Feldene), and naproxen (Naprosyn). Aspirin and
sulindac (Clinoril) do not affect lithium concentrations.
The coadministration of lithium and quetiapine (Seroquel) may cause
somnolence but is otherwise well tolerated. The coadministration of lithium
and ziprasidone (Geodon) may modestly increase the incidence of tremors.
The coadministration of lithium and calcium channel inhibitors should be
avoided because of potentially fatal neurotoxicity.
A person taking lithium who is about to undergo ECT should discontinue
taking lithium 2 days before beginning ECT to reduce the risk of delirium.
Laboratory Interferences
Lithium does not interfere with any laboratory tests, but lithium-induced
alterations include an increased WBC count, decreased serum thyroxine, and
increased serum calcium. Blood collected in a lithium–heparin anticoagulant
tube will produce falsely elevated lithium concentrations.
Dosage and Clinical Guidelines




<<<PAGE 3660>>>

smell, 21–22
visual inspection, 21
Generativity, mental health and, 1036
Genes, mental disorders and, 923
Genetic counseling. See also Psychiatric genetic counseling
definitions, 794
risk communication, 797
steps and process, 796t
symbols for pedigree, 795f
Genetic epistemology, 1007
Genetic markers, 989
Genitourinary system, review of, 20
Genome-wide association (GWA) studies, 990
of bipolar disorders, 985
gene mapping and, 987f
Geodon. See Ziprasidone
Geophagia, 163
Geriatric Depression Scale, 54t, 90
Geriatric Depression Scale (Short Version), 806t
Geriatric psychiatry
psychiatric problems of elderly, 804. See also Mental disorders of old
age
psychopharmacological treatment, 809
psychotherapeutic interventions, 809
Gerstmann–Sträussler–Scheinker disorder (GSS), 257
Gerstmann syndrome, 145, 927. See also Mathematics deficits
Gesell, Arnold, 887
Gesell Infant Scale, 81
Gilligan, Carol, 902
Global and cultural issues in psychiatry, 875–881. See also World
psychiatry
Glucophage. See Metformin
Gobal aphasia, 48
Goldstein, Kurt, 236, 1081
Goodenough Draw-a-Person Test, 85
Goodness of fit, 893
Grammar, 107




<<<PAGE 3738>>>

Seasonality, 1003–1004
Seclusion and restraint, 841
indications and contraindications for, 841t
restrictions for, 841t
Secobarbital, 298
Secondary autonomous ego functions, 1065
Secondary prevention, 868
Secondary revision, 1059
Second-generation antidepressants, 591
Second-generation or atypical antipsychotic (SGA) drugs, 594, 608
adverse effects, 609
aripiprazole (Abilify), 612–613
asenapine (Saphris), 613
clinical guidelines, 615
clozapine (Clozaril), 613–614
dosing, 616t
drugs approved by FDA, 608
lumateperone (Caplyta), 615
lurasidone (Latuda), 614–615
mechanisms of action, 608–609
for mood disorders, 609
olanzapine (Zyprexa), 610–611
paliperidone (Invega), 610
quetiapine (Seroquel), 611–612
risk of extrapyramidal side effects (EPS), 608
risperidone (Risperdal), 609–610
for schizophrenia and schizoaffective disorder, 609
therapeutic indications, 609
ziprasidone (Geodon), 612
Second individuation, 906
Sedating drugs, 602
Sedative-, hypnotic-, anxiolytic-related disorders, 298–302
abuse, patterns of
intravenous use, 299
oral use, 298–299
clinical features
barbiturate-like substances, 298


