<<<PAGE 414>>>

and inattention in preschoolers with autism spectrum disorder found the
stimulant safe and relatively efficacious; half of the preschoolers developed
side effects including increased stereotypies, gastrointestinal upset, sleep
problems, and emotional lability. Among nonstimulants, one double-blind
placebo-controlled study of hyperactivity, impulsivity, and inattention using
atomoxetine in children with autism spectrum disorder found that it was
significantly more effective than placebo. Side effects included sedation,
irritability, constipation, and nausea. Clonidine, an α-agonist, has also been
studied in children with autism spectrum disorder for the treatment of
hyperactivity with mixed results. Guanfacine may also help in some cases.
Repetitive and Stereotypic Behavior. Antidepressants and mood
stabilizers have been studied for the treatment of these core symptoms of
autism spectrum disorder. One study with fluoxetine found the medication
group only slightly better and not significantly better than the placebo group
regarding the target symptoms, and another trial with escitalopram found no
difference between groups. Risperidone, however, was found to be effective
in targeting irritability, and restrictive and repetitive behaviors were
improved. One study using valproate in a 12-week trial with 55 children with
a mean age of 9½ years with autism spectrum disorder found that those who
were considered responders to irritability also spent less time engaging in
repetitive behaviors.
Agents Administered for Behavioral Impairment in Autism
Spectrum Disorder Based On Open Trials. Quetiapine is an
antipsychotic with more potent 5-HT2A than D2 receptor blocking properties.
Although there are only open-label trials with this agent, some experts use
this when risperidone and olanzapine fail or are intolerable. Doses range from
50 to 200 mg/day. Adverse effects include drowsiness, tachycardia, agitation,
and weight gain.
Clozapine has a heterocyclic chemical structure that is related to certain
first-generation antipsychotics, such as loxapine, although clozapine carries a
lower risk of extrapyramidal symptoms. It is not generally used in the
treatment of aggression and self-injurious behavior unless those behaviors
coexist with psychotic symptoms. The most severe adverse effect is
agranulocytosis, which necessitates monitoring white blood cell count weekly




<<<PAGE 567>>>

depression severity pretreatment and posttreatment using parent ratings on
the Preschool Reelings Checklist-Scale Version (PFC-S), a 20-item checklist.
Results revealed that both groups showed significant improvement, with
particular improvement in the PCIT-ED group concerning emotion
recognition, child executive functioning, and parenting stress. This pilot
study indicates that PCIT-ED is a promising novel intervention for preschool
depression that deserves further investigation.
Pharmacotherapy
Fluoxetine and escitalopram have FDA approval in the treatment of major
depression in adolescents. Three RCTs of fluoxetine in depressed children
and adolescents demonstrate its efficacy. The common side effects are similar
as for adults: headache, gastrointestinal symptoms, sedation, and insomnia.
Short-term randomized clinical trials have demonstrated the efficacy of
citalopram and sertraline compared with placebo in the treatment of major
depression in children and adolescents. Sertraline was efficacious in two
multicenter, double-blind, placebo-controlled trials of 376 children and
adolescents. The doses of sertraline ranged from 50 to 200 mg a day or
placebo. Nearly 70 percent of the subjects had a greater than 40 percent
decrease in depression rating scale scores (compared with 56 percent in the
placebo group). The most common side effects are anorexia, vomiting,
diarrhea, and agitation.
Citalopram has been demonstrated in one RCT in the United States to be
efficacious in 174 children and adolescents treated with citalopram at doses
of 20 to 40 mg a day or placebo for 8 weeks. Significantly more of the group
on citalopram showed improvement compared with placebo on the
depression rating scale (CDRS-R). A significantly increased response rate
(response defined as less than 28 on CDRS-R) of 35 percent occurred in the
citalopram group, compared with 24 percent of the placebo group. Common
side effects that emerged included headache, nausea, insomnia, rhinitis,
abdominal pain, dizziness, fatigue, and flu-like symptoms.
RCTs to date that have not shown efficacy on primary outcome measures
include those using mirtazapine and tricyclic antidepressants. A metaanalysis of SSRI trials in depressed children and adolescents found the
efficacy of SSRIs compared to placebo with an average response rate of 60




<<<PAGE 1108>>>

Mrs. P is a 47-year-old, divorced, unemployed woman who lived alone
and who experienced chronic psychotic symptoms despite treatment with
olanzapine 20 mg per day and citalopram 20 mg per day. She believed
that she was getting messages from God and the police department to go
on a mission to fight against drugs. She also believed that an organized
crime group was trying to stop her in this pursuit. The onset of her illness
began at age 20 years when she experienced the first of several
depressive episodes. She also described periods when she felt more
energetic and talkative, had a decreased need for sleep, and was more
active, sometimes cleaning her house throughout the night. About 4 years
after the onset of her symptoms, she began to hear “voices” that became
stronger when she was depressed but were still present and disturbed her
even when her mood was euthymic. About 10 years after her illness
began, she developed the belief that policemen were everywhere and that
the neighbors were spying on her. She was hospitalized voluntarily. Two
years later, she had another depressive episode, and the auditory
hallucinations told her she could not live in her apartment. She was tried
on lithium, antidepressants, and antipsychotic medications but continued
to be chronically symptomatic with mood symptoms as well as psychosis.
Mrs. P demonstrates a “classic” presentation of schizoaffective
disorder in which clear depressive and hypomanic episodes are present in
combination with continuous psychotic illness and first-rank symptoms.
Her course is typical of many individuals with schizoaffective disorder.
Schizophreniform Disorder
The symptoms of schizophreniform are similar to those of schizophrenia.
However, with schizophreniform disorder, the symptoms are short term,
lasting at least 1 month but less than 6 months. Patients with
schizophreniform disorder should then return to their baseline level of
functioning.
Like schizoaffective disorder, schizophreniform disorder appears to be a
heterogeneous disorder. Many patients seem to have a disorder that is similar
to schizophrenia, while others may have a disorder more like a mood
disorder.




<<<PAGE 1247>>>

Maintenance

6–24 mo Return to full
or
function and
longer
quality of life
Prevention of
recurrence

Continue
psychoeducation
Rehabilitate
Manage
comorbidities
Monitor for
recurrence

Modified from Lam RW, McIntosh D, Wang J, Enns MW, Kolivakis T, Michalak EE, Sareen J,
Song WY, Kennedy SH, MacQueen GM, Milev RV, Parikh SV, Ravindran AV; CANMAT
Depression Work Group. Canadian Network for Mood and Anxiety Treatments (CANMAT)
2016 clinical guidelines for the management of adults with major depressive disorder: section
1. Disease burden and principles of care. Can J Psychiatry. 2016;61(9):510–523.

Table 7-11
SSRI and SNRI Antidepressant Medications and Their Side
Effect Profiles
Side Effect Frequency
Drug Class

Recommended 10–30%
Dose Range
(mg)

>30%

SSRI
Citalopram

20–40

Nausea, dry mouth, None
sweating

Escitalopram

10–20

Male sexual
dysfunction and
nausea

Fluoxetine

20–60

Nausea, dry mouth, None
somnolence,
nervousness,
anxiety,
insomnia,
tremor, anorexia

Fluvoxamine

100–300

Dry mouth,

None

Nausea




<<<PAGE 1356>>>

TREATMENT
Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder
Pharmacotherapy. Effective medications include clomipramine and
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs, which, along with
clomipramine and other serotonergic medications, are sometimes called
serotonin reuptake inhibitor [SRIs]). Head-to-head comparisons of
clomipramine and SSRIs show equal efficacy but better tolerability of the
SSRIs. In general, clinicians must use higher doses to achieve an optimal
effect. Examples are doses of 80 mg of fluoxetine or 200 mg of sertraline.
Some patients respond to even higher doses. Exceeding the recommended
doses is not, however, advisable for clomipramine or citalopram, due to
safety concerns. There is also some evidence that response to SRIs is slower
in OCD than in depression; clinicians are therefore encouraged to prescribe
an SRI for at least 12 weeks before deciding to switch agents or augment
with another psychotropic. A general rule of thumb is that we should
continue to use the dose that was required to obtain a response for at least 1
to 2 years. When discontinuing medication, there is a real risk of relapse, so
this should be done very gradually, with small adjustments made every few
months.
Patients who fail to respond to one SRI may respond to another.
The most extensive evidence base is for antipsychotics in adult OCD.
Among those, risperidone and aripiprazole are best supported as adjuncts.
Some studies have indicated that these are particularly useful in patients with
tics, but not all data are consistent. When a response to these agents occurs, it
typically happens relatively quickly (e.g., 4 weeks). When using dopamine
receptor blockers, it is crucial to monitor adverse events.
Memantine, riluzole, ketamine, lamotrigine, and N-acetylcysteine (NAC)
are other promising augmentation agents.
Psychotherapy. There is a long history of understanding OCD symptoms
from a psychodynamic perspective, but there is no rigorous evidence that a
psychodynamic approach is useful in the treatment of OCD. Instead,
empirical research on the psychotherapy of OCD has emerged from
behavioral and cognitive perspectives. Exposure and response prevention




<<<PAGE 1523>>>

antidepressants that may be helpful include other SSRIs (although concerns
about prolonged QT intervals with higher doses limit the utility of citalopram
in this population), TCAs (particularly amitriptyline and desipramine),
trazodone, and monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs). Bupropion is
contraindicated due to an increased risk of seizure in this population. In
general, most of the antidepressants other than fluoxetine have been effective
at dosages usually given in the treatment of depressive disorders. Medication
is helpful in patients with comorbid depressive disorders and bulimia
nervosa. Topiramate may have some efficacy in reducing binge episodes in
bulimia nervosa, as may lisdexamfetamine. Evidence indicates that CBT and
medications (particularly fluoxetine) are the most effective combination.
Treatment of Binge-Eating Disorder
Psychotherapy. CBT is the most effective psychological treatment for
binge-eating disorder and should be considered a first-line treatment. CBT
can lead to decreases in binge eating and associated problems (e.g.,
depression); however, studies have not shown marked weight loss as a result
of CBT. CBT combined with psychopharmacological treatments such as
SSRIs shows better results than CBT alone. Exercise has also shown a
reduction in binge eating when combined with CBT. Interpersonal
psychotherapy (IPT) is also effective in the treatment of binge-eating
disorder; however, therapy focuses more on the interpersonal problems that
contribute to the disorder rather than disturbances in eating behavior. There is
also some evidence for the use of dialectical behavior therapy for bingeeating disorder.
Psychopharmacotherapy. Symptoms of binge eating may benefit from
medication treatment, with strong evidence supporting the use of
lisdexamfetamine for both weight loss and reduction of binge episodes.
Antidepressant medications have demonstrated improvement in binge eating,
but typically do not result in sustained weight loss; these include fluoxetine,
fluvoxamine, citalopram, escitalopram, sertraline, duloxetine, and bupropion.
The anticonvulsants topiramate and zonisamide may improve binge-eating
disorder, particularly with moderate weight loss. Topiramate may also reduce
binge episodes.




<<<PAGE 1822>>>

between complying with the therapist and losing an external pathologic
relationship. Therapists must show great respect for these patients’ feelings of
attachment, no matter how pathologic these feelings may seem.
Pharmacotherapy. Pharmacotherapy can help deal with specific
symptoms, such as anxiety and depression, which are commonly associated
features of dependent personality disorder. Patients who experience panic
attacks or who have high levels of separation anxiety may benefit from
symptom-targeted pharmacotherapy, such as antidepressant agents.
Obsessive-Compulsive Personality Disorder
Psychotherapy. Unlike patients with other personality disorders, some
individuals with obsessive-compulsive personality disorder are often aware
of their suffering and seek treatment on their own. Though limited evidence
exists to guide treatment, there have been several studies that support
cognitive therapy or cognitive behavioral therapy as an effective treatment for
individuals with this disorder, delivered either individually or in a group.
Additionally, interpersonal psychotherapy may improve depressive
symptoms in individuals with obsessive-compulsive personality disorder.
Pharmacotherapy. There is limited evidence for the pharmacologic
treatment of obsessive-compulsive personality disorder. Some studies have
suggested benefits from fluvoxamine and carbamazepine, and in those
patients with comorbid depression, citalopram may be helpful. In one study
comparing citalopram and sertraline, both medications reduced the number of
obsessive-compulsive personality disorder traits, though citalopram
performed better than sertraline.
Personality Change due to Another Medical Condition
Management of personality change disorder involves the treatment of the
underlying medical condition when possible. Psychopharmacological
treatment of specific symptoms may help in some cases, such as
antidepressants for depression or anticonvulsants for irritability, aggression,
or impulsivity.
Patients with severe cognitive impairment or weakened behavioral controls




<<<PAGE 1974>>>

21.2 Antidepressants
SELECTIVE SEROTONIN REUPTAKE INHIBITORS
Fluoxetine (Prozac), the first SSRI marketed in the United States, rapidly
captured the favor of both clinicians and the general public as reports
emerged of dramatic patient responses to treatment of depression. Patients no
longer experienced such side effects as dry mouth, constipation, sedation,
orthostatic hypotension, and tachycardia, typical side effects associated with
the earlier antidepressant drugs—the TCAs and MAOIs. It was also
significantly safer when taken in overdose than any previously available
antidepressant. A significant effect of fluoxetine’s popularity was that it
helped ameliorate the long-standing stigma of depression and its treatment.
Table 21-15
Currently Approved Indications of the Selective Serotonin
Reuptake Inhibitors in the United States for Adult and
Pediatric Populations

Other SSRIs followed fluoxetine. These include sertraline (Zoloft),
paroxetine (Paxil), fluvoxamine (Luvox), citalopram (Celexa), escitalopram
(Lexapro), and vilazodone (Viibryd). These drugs are all equally effective in




<<<PAGE 1975>>>

treating depression. However, some are approved by the U.S. FDA for
multiple indications, such as major depression, OCD, PTSD, PMDD, panic
disorder, and social phobia (social anxiety disorder) (Table 21-15). Note that
fluvoxamine is not FDA approved as an antidepressant, a fact that is due to a
marketing decision. It is considered an antidepressant in other countries.
Although all SSRIs are equally effective, there are meaningful differences
in pharmacodynamics, pharmacokinetics, and side effects, differences that
might affect clinical responses among individual patients. This would explain
why some patients have better clinical responses to a particular SSRI than
another. The SSRIs have proven more problematic in terms of some side
effects than the original clinical trials suggested. Quality-of-life–associated
adverse effects such as nausea, sexual dysfunction, and weight gain
sometimes mitigate the therapeutic benefits of the SSRIs. There can also be
distressing withdrawal symptoms when SSRIs are stopped abruptly. This
withdrawal is especially true with paroxetine but also occurs when other
SSRIs with short half-lives are stopped.
Pharmacologic Actions
Pharmacokinetics. A significant difference among the SSRIs is their
broad range of serum half-lives. Fluoxetine has the most prolonged half-life:
4 to 6 days; its active metabolite has a half-life of 7 to 9 days. The half-life of
sertraline is 26 hours, and its less active metabolite has a half-life of 3 to 5
days. The half-lives of the other three, which do not have metabolites with
significant pharmacologic activity, are 35 hours for citalopram, 27 to 32
hours for escitalopram, 21 hours for paroxetine, and 15 hours for
fluvoxamine. As a rule, the SSRIs are well absorbed after oral administration
and have their peak effects in the range of 3 to 8 hours. Absorption of
sertraline may be slightly enhanced by food.
There are also differences in plasma protein–binding percentages among
the SSRIs, with sertraline, fluoxetine, and paroxetine being the most highly
bound and escitalopram being the least bound.
All SSRIs are metabolized in the liver by the CYP450 enzymes. Because
the SSRIs have such a broad therapeutic index, other drugs rarely produce
problematic increases in SSRI concentrations. The most critical drug–drug
interactions involving the SSRIs occur as a result of the SSRIs inhibiting the




<<<PAGE 1976>>>

metabolism of the coadministered medication. Each of the SSRIs possesses a
potential for slowing or blocking the metabolism of many drugs (Table 2116). Fluvoxamine is the most problematic of the drugs in this respect. It has a
marked effect on several of the CYP enzymes. Examples of clinically
significant interactions include fluvoxamine and theophylline (Slo-Bid, TheoDur) through CYP1A2 interaction, fluvoxamine and clozapine (Clozaril)
through CYP1A2 inhibition; and fluvoxamine with alprazolam (Xanax) or
clonazepam (Klonopin) through CYP3A4 inhibition. Fluoxetine and
paroxetine also possess significant effects on the CYP2D6 isozyme, which
may interfere with the efficacy of opiate analogs, such as codeine and
hydrocodone, by blocking the conversion of these agents to their active form.
Thus, coadministration of fluoxetine and paroxetine with an opiate interferes
with its analgesic effects. Sertraline, citalopram, and escitalopram are least
likely to complicate treatment because of interactions.
The pharmacokinetics of vilazodone (5 to 80 mg) is dose-proportional.
Steady-state plasma levels are achieved in about 3 days. The elimination of
vilazodone is primarily by hepatic metabolism with a terminal half-life of
approximately 25 hours.
Pharmacodynamics. The SSRIs are believed to exert their therapeutic
effects through serotonin reuptake inhibition. They derive their name because
they have little effect on the reuptake of norepinephrine or dopamine. Often,
adequate clinical activity and saturation of the 5-HT transporters are achieved
at starting dosages. As a rule, higher dosages do not increase antidepressant
efficacy but may increase the risk of adverse effects.
Table 21-16
CYP450 Inhibitory Potential of Commonly Prescribed
Antidepressants




<<<PAGE 1977>>>

Citalopram and escitalopram are the most selective inhibitors of serotonin
reuptake, with very little inhibition of norepinephrine or dopamine reuptake
and very low affinities for histamine H1, GABA, or benzodiazepine
receptors. The other SSRIs have a similar profile except that fluoxetine
weakly inhibits norepinephrine reuptake and binds to 5-HT2C receptors,
sertraline weakly inhibits norepinephrine and dopamine reuptake, and
paroxetine has significant anticholinergic activity at higher dosages and binds
to nitric oxide synthase. The SSRI vilazodone has 5-HT1A receptor agonist
properties. The clinical implications of the 5-HT1A receptor agonist effects
are not yet evident.
A pharmacodynamic interaction appears to underlie the antidepressant
effects of combined fluoxetine–olanzapine. When taken together, these drugs
increase brain concentrations of norepinephrine. Concomitant use of SSRIs
and drugs in the triptan class (sumatriptan [Imitrex], naratriptan [Amerge],
rizatriptan [Maxalt], and zolmitriptan [Zomig]) may result in a severe
pharmacodynamic interaction—the development of serotonin syndrome (see
“Precautions and Adverse Reactions”). However, many people use triptans
while taking low doses of an SSRI for headache prophylaxis without adverse
reaction. A similar reaction may occur when SSRIs are combined with
tramadol (Ultram).
Therapeutic Indications
Depression. In the United States, all SSRIs other than fluvoxamine have
been approved by the FDA for the treatment of depression. Several studies




<<<PAGE 1982>>>

OCD as a genetically determined, lifelong condition that is best treated
continuously with drugs and cognitive-behavioral therapy from the onset of
symptoms in childhood throughout the lifespan.
SSRI dosages for OCD may need to be higher than those required to treat
depression. Although some responses can be seen in the first few weeks of
treatment, it may take several months for the maximum effects to become
evident. Patients who fail to obtain adequate relief of their OCD symptoms
with an SSRI will usually benefit from the addition of a small dose of
risperidone (Risperdal). Apart from the extrapyramidal side effects of
risperidone, patients should be monitored for increases in prolactin levels
when this combination is used. Clinically, hyperprolactinemia may manifest
as gynecomastia and galactorrhea (in both men and women) and loss of
menses.
Several disorders are now considered to be within the OCD spectrum. This
spectrum includes several conditions and symptoms characterized by
nonsuicidal self-mutilation, such as trichotillomania, eyebrow picking, nose
picking, nail-biting, compulsive picking of skin blemishes, and cutting.
Patients with these behaviors benefit from treatment with SSRIs. Other
spectrum disorders include compulsive gambling, compulsive shopping,
hypochondriasis, and body dysmorphic disorder.
PANIC DISORDER. Paroxetine, fluoxetine, and sertraline are indicated for the

treatment of panic disorder, with or without agoraphobia. These agents work
less rapidly than do benzodiazepines but are far superior to them for the
treatment of panic disorder with comorbid depression. Citalopram and
fluvoxamine also may reduce spontaneous or induced panic attacks. Because
fluoxetine can initially heighten anxiety symptoms, persons with panic
disorder must begin taking small dosages (5 mg a day) and increase the
dosage slowly. Low doses of benzodiazepines may be given to manage this
side effect.
SOCIAL ANXIETY DISORDER. SSRIs are effective agents in the treatment of

social phobia. They reduce both symptoms and disability. The response rate
is comparable to that seen with the MAOI phenelzine (Nardil), the previous
standard treatment. The SSRIs are safer to use than MAOIs or
benzodiazepines.




<<<PAGE 1986>>>

stools are usually dose-related and transient, usually resolving within a few
weeks. Sometimes flatulence and diarrhea persist, especially during sertraline
treatment. Initial anorexia may also occur and is most frequent with
fluoxetine. SSRI-induced appetite and weight loss begin as soon as the drug
is taken and peak at 20 weeks, after which weight often returns to baseline.
Up to one-third of persons taking SSRIs will gain weight, sometimes more
than 20 lb. This effect is mediated through a metabolic mechanism, an
increase in appetite, or both. It happens gradually and is usually resistant to
diet and exercise regimens. Paroxetine is associated with more frequent,
rapid, and pronounced weight gain than the other SSRIs, especially among
young women.
Cardiovascular Effects. All SSRIs can lengthen the QT interval in
otherwise healthy people and cause drug-induced long QT syndrome,
especially when taken in overdose. The risk of QTc prolongation increases
when an antidepressant and an antipsychotic are used in combination, an
increasingly common practice. Citalopram stands out as the SSRI with the
most pronounced effect on QT intervals. A QT study to assess the effects of
20- and 60-mg doses of citalopram on the QT interval in adults, compared
with placebo, found a maximum mean prolongation in the individually
corrected QT intervals were 8.5 milliseconds for 20-mg citalopram and 18.5
milliseconds for 60 mg. For 40 mg, prolongation of the corrected QT interval
was estimated to be 12.6 milliseconds. Based on these findings, the FDA has
issued the following recommendation regarding citalopram use:
20 mg a day is the maximum recommended dose for patients with hepatic
impairment, who are older than 60 years of age, who are CYP2C19 poor
metabolizers, or who are taking concomitant cimetidine (Tagamet).
No longer prescribe at doses greater than 40 mg a day.
Do not use in patients with congenital long QT syndrome.
Correct hypokalemia and hypomagnesemia before administering
citalopram.
Monitor electrolytes as clinically indicated.
Consider more frequent electrocardiograms in patients with congestive
heart failure, bradyarrhythmias, or patients on concomitant medications that




<<<PAGE 1987>>>

prolong the QT interval.
The fact that citalopram carries a greater risk of causing fatal rhythm
abnormalities was confirmed in a review of 469 SSRI poisoning admissions.
Accordingly, patients should be advised to contact their prescriber
immediately if they experience signs and symptoms of an abnormal heart rate
or rhythm while taking citalopram.
The effect of vilazodone (20, 40, 60, and 80 mg) on the QTc interval was
evaluated, and a small effect was observed. The upper bound of the 90
percent confidence interval for the largest placebo-adjusted, baselinecorrected QTc interval was below 10 milliseconds, based on the individual
correction method (QTcI). This interval is below the threshold for clinical
concern. However, it is unknown whether 80 mg is adequate to represent a
high clinical exposure condition.
Physicians should consider whether the benefits of androgen deprivation
therapy outweigh the potential risks in SSRI treated patients with prostate
cancer, as reductions in androgen levels can cause QTc interval prolongation.
Dextromethorphan/Quinidine (Nuedexta) is available as a treatment for
pseudobulbar affect, which is defined by involuntary, sudden, and frequent
episodes of laughing or crying that are generally out of proportion or
inappropriate to the situation. Quinidine can prolong the QT interval and is a
potent inhibitor of CYP2D6. It should not be used with other medications that
prolong the QT interval and are metabolized by CYP2D6. This drug should
be used with caution with any medications that can prolong the QT interval
and inhibit CYP3A4, particularly in patients with cardiac disease.
Antepartum use of SSRIs is sometimes associated with QTc interval
prolongation in exposed neonates. In a review of 52 newborns exposed to
SSRIs in the immediate antepartum period and 52 matched control subjects,
the mean QTc was significantly longer in the group of newborns exposed to
antidepressants as compared with control subjects. Five (10 percent)
newborns exposed to SSRIs had a markedly prolonged QTc interval (greater
than 460 milliseconds) compared with none of the unexposed newborns. The
most extended QTc interval observed among exposed newborns was 543
milliseconds. All of the drug-associated repolarization abnormalities
normalized in subsequent electrocardiographic tracings.
Headaches. The incidence of headache in SSRI trials was 18 to 20 percent,




<<<PAGE 1988>>>

only one percentage point higher than the placebo rate. Fluoxetine is the most
likely to cause headaches. On the other hand, all SSRIs are effective
prophylaxis against both migraine and tension-type headaches in many
persons.
Central Nervous System Adverse Effects
ANXIETY. Fluoxetine may cause anxiety, particularly in the first few weeks of
treatment. However, these initial effects usually give way to an overall
reduction in anxiety after a few weeks. Increased anxiety is caused
considerably less frequently by paroxetine and escitalopram, which may be
better choices if sedation is desired, as in mixed anxiety and depressive
disorders.
The primary effect SSRIs exert in the area of
insomnia and sedation is improved sleep resulting from the treatment of
depression and anxiety. However, as many as 25 percent of persons taking
SSRIs note trouble sleeping, excessive somnolence, or overwhelming fatigue.
Fluoxetine is the most likely to cause insomnia, for which reason it is often
taken in the morning. Sertraline and fluvoxamine are about equally likely to
cause insomnia as somnolence, and citalopram and especially paroxetine
often cause somnolence. Escitalopram is more likely to interfere with sleep
than its isomer, citalopram. Some persons benefit from taking their SSRI
dose before going to bed, but others prefer to take it the morning. SSRIinduced insomnia can be treated with benzodiazepines, trazodone (Desyrel)
(clinicians must explain the risk of priapism), or other sedating medicines.
Significant SSRI-induced somnolence often requires switching to the use of
another SSRI or bupropion.
INSOMNIA AND SEDATION.

OTHER SLEEP EFFECTS. Many persons taking SSRIs report recalling extremely

vivid dreams or nightmares. They describe sleep as “busy.” Other sleep
effects of the SSRIs include bruxism, restless legs, nocturnal myoclonus, and
sweating.
Emotional blunting is a largely overlooked but
frequent side effect associated with chronic SSRI use. Patients report an
EMOTIONAL BLUNTING.




<<<PAGE 1993>>>

CYP2D6 enzyme. Cimetidine can increase the concentration of sertraline and
paroxetine, and phenobarbital (Luminal) and phenytoin can decrease the
concentration of paroxetine. Because of the potential for interference with the
CYP2D6 enzyme, the coadministration of paroxetine with other
antidepressants, phenothiazines, and antiarrhythmic drugs should be
undertaken with caution. Paroxetine may increase the anticoagulant effect of
warfarin. Coadministration of paroxetine and tramadol may precipitate
serotonin syndrome in elderly persons.
Fluvoxamine. Among the SSRIs, fluvoxamine appears to present the most
risk for drug–drug interactions. Fluvoxamine is metabolized by the enzyme
CYP3A4, which may be inhibited by ketoconazole (Nizoral). Fluvoxamine
may increase the half-life of alprazolam, triazolam (Halcion), and diazepam,
and it should not be coadministered with these agents. Fluvoxamine may
increase theophylline levels threefold and warfarin levels twofold, with
significant clinical consequences; thus, the serum levels of the latter drugs
should be closely monitored, and the doses adjusted accordingly.
Fluvoxamine raises concentrations and may increase the activity of clozapine,
carbamazepine, methadone (Dolophine, Methadose), propranolol (Inderal),
and diltiazem (Cardizem). Fluvoxamine has no significant interactions with
lorazepam (Ativan) or digoxin (Lanoxin).
Citalopram. Citalopram is not a potent inhibitor of any CYP enzymes.
Concurrent administration of cimetidine increases concentrations of
citalopram by about 40 percent. Citalopram does not significantly affect the
metabolism of, nor is its metabolism significantly affected by, digoxin,
lithium, warfarin, carbamazepine, or imipramine (Tofranil). Citalopram
increases the plasma concentrations of metoprolol (Lopressor) twofold, but
this usually does not affect BP or heart rate. Data on coadministration of
citalopram and potent inhibitors of CYP3A4 or CYP2D6 are not available.
Escitalopram. Escitalopram is a moderate inhibitor of CYP2D6 and has
been shown to raise desipramine (Norpramin) and metoprolol concentrations
significantly.
Vilazodone. Vilazodone dose should be reduced to 20 mg when




<<<PAGE 1996>>>

swallowed with food without chewing the tablet. Abrupt discontinuation of
fluvoxamine may cause a discontinuation syndrome owing to its short halflife.
Citalopram. Citalopram is available in 20- and 40-mg scored tablets and as
a liquid (10 mg/5 mL). The usual starting dosage is 20 mg a day for the first
week, after which it usually is increased to 40 mg a day. For elderly persons
or persons with hepatic impairment, 20 mg a day is recommended. Tablets
should be taken once daily in either the morning or the evening with or
without food.
Escitalopram. Escitalopram is available as 10- and 20-mg scored tablets, as
well as an oral solution at a concentration of 5 mg/5 mL. The recommended
dosage of escitalopram is 10 mg/day. In clinical trials, no additional benefit
was noted when 20 mg/day was used.
Vilazodone. Vilazodone is available as 10-, 20-, and 40-mg tablets. The
recommended therapeutic dose of vilazodone is 40 mg once daily. Treatment
should be titrated, starting with an initial dose of 10 mg once daily for 7 days,
followed by 20 mg once daily for an additional 7 days, and then an increase
to 40 mg once daily. Vilazodone should be taken with food. If vilazodone is
taken without food, inadequate drug concentrations may result, and the
drug’s effectiveness may be diminished. Vilazodone is not approved for use
in children. The safety and efficacy of vilazodone in pediatric patients have
not been studied. The patient’s age should not influence the dose, nor does
mild or moderate hepatic impairment. Vilazodone has not been studied in
patients with severe hepatic impairment. No dose adjustment is
recommended in patients with mild, moderate, or severe renal impairment.
Pregnancy and Breastfeeding. Except for paroxetine, the SSRIs are safe
to take during pregnancy when deemed necessary for the treatment of the
mother. There are no controlled human data regarding vilazodone use during
pregnancy, nor are there human data regarding drug concentrations in breast
milk. Transient QTc prolongation has been noted in newborns whose mother
was being treated with an SSRI during pregnancy.




<<<PAGE 1999>>>

medications that selectively enhance only noradrenergic or serotoninergic
neurotransmission. This more significant therapeutic benefit could result
from an acceleration of postsynaptic adaptation to increased neuronal
signaling, simultaneous activation of two pathways for intracellular signal
transduction, additive effects on the activity of relevant genes such as brainderived neurotrophic factor, or, quite simply, broader coverage of depressive
symptoms. Clinical evidence supporting this hypothesis first emerged in a
pair of studies conducted by the Danish University Antidepressant Group,
which found an advantage for the dual reuptake inhibitor clomipramine
compared with SSRIs citalopram (Celexa) and paroxetine (Paxil). Another
report, which compared the results of a group of patients prospectively
treated with the combination of desipramine (Norpramin) and fluoxetine
(Prozac) with a historical comparison group treated with desipramine alone,
provided additional support. A meta-analysis of 25 inpatient studies
comparing the efficacy of TCAs and SSRIs yielded the most substantial
evidence. Specifically, although the TCAs were found to have a modest
overall advantage, superiority versus SSRIs was almost entirely explained by
the studies that used the TCAs that are considered to be dual reuptake
inhibitors—clomipramine, amitriptyline, and imipramine. Meta-analyses of
head-to-head studies suggest that venlafaxine has the potential to induce
higher rates of remission in depressed patients than do the SSRIs. This
difference in the venlafaxine advantage is about 6 percent. DVS has not been
extensively compared with other classes of antidepressants concerning
efficacy.
The extended-release formulation of
venlafaxine is approved for the treatment of GAD. In clinical trials lasting 6
months, dosages of 75 to 225 mg a day were effective in treating insomnia,
poor concentration, restlessness, irritability, and excessive muscle tension
related to GAD.
GENERALIZED ANXIETY DISORDER.

SOCIAL ANXIETY DISORDER. The extended-release formulation of venlafaxine

is approved for the treatment of social anxiety disorder. Its efficacy was
established in 12-week studies.
OTHER INDICATIONS. Case reports and uncontrolled studies have indicated that




<<<PAGE 2260>>>

Kim SW, Shin IS, Kim JM, Park KH, Youn T, Yoon JS. Factors potentiating
the risk of mirtazapine-associated restless legs syndrome. Hum
Psychopharmocol. 2008;(7):615–620.
Kocsis JH, Leon AC, Markowitz JC, Manber R, Arnow B, Klein DN, Thase
ME. Patient preference as a moderator of outcome for chronic forms of
major depressive disorder treated with nefazodone, cognitive behavioral
analysis system of psychotherapy, or their combination. J Clin Psychiatry.
2009;70(3):354–361.
Koibuchi N. The role of thyroid hormone on functional organization in the
cerebellum. Cerebellum. 2013;12(3):304–306.
Kostrubsky SE, Strom SC, Kalgutkar AS, Kulkarni S, Atherton J. Inhibition
of hepatobiliary transport as a predictive method for clinical hepatotoxicity
of nefazodone. Toxicol Sci. 2006;90(2):451–459.
Lai MW, Klein-Schwartz W, Rodgers GC, Abrams JY, Haber DA. 2005
Annual report of the American Association of Poison Control Centers’
national poisoning and exposure database. Clin Toxicol. 2006;44:803–932.
Lam RW, Andersen HF, Wade AG. Escitalopram and duloxetine in the
treatment of major depressive disorder: a pooled analysis of two trials. Int
Clin Psychopharmacol. 2008;23(4):181.
Lapierre YD. A review of trimipramine: 30 years of clinical use. Drugs.
1989;38(Suppl 1):
17–24.
Lieberman DZ, Montgomery SA, Tourian KA, Brisard C, Rosas G. A pooled
analysis of two placebo-controlled trials of desvenlafaxine in major
depressive disorder. Int Clin Psychopharmacol. 2008;23:188–197.
Liebowitz MR, Manley AL, Padmanabhan SK, Ganguly R, Tummala R.
Efficacy, safety, and tolerability of desvenlafaxine 50 mg/day and 100
mg/day in outpatients with major depressive disorder. Curr Med Res Opin.
2008;24:1877–1890.
Liebowitz MR, Quitkin FM, Stewart JW. Antidepressant specificity in
atypical depression. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 1988;45:129–137.
Lojko D, Rybakowski JK. L-Thyroxine augmentation of serotonergic
antidepressants in female patients with refractory depression. J Affect
Disord. 2007;103(1–3):
253–256.
Looper KL. Potential medical and surgical complications of serotonergic




<<<PAGE 2466>>>

Rachel, a 25-year-old woman, presented with depressive symptoms and
abdominal pain. After an extensive psychiatric and medical evaluation,
she received a diagnosis of major depression of moderate severity and
irritable bowel disorder. She began a course of CBT targeting her
negative attributional style and low self-esteem, and she learned
relaxation and distraction techniques for her pain. After a 12-week trial,
she experienced only partial remission of her symptoms, and the
psychiatrist offered her an antidepressant, citalopram at 20 mg per day.
Her depressive symptoms remitted within 1 month, and she was able to
function better at work but socially remained hesitant to engage with her
peers. Her abdominal pain persisted, and she began to exhibit a pattern of
disordered eating, severely restricting her intake to 500 calories per day
due to the “pain.” She experienced a 15-lb weight loss over the next
several months. An intensive behavioral plan to target eating was begun,
as well as continued probing of her negative cognitions relating to eating,
pain, and newly emerging concerns that she would regain the weight too
quickly and would become “fat.” She did not meet the criteria for
anorexia nervosa, although her cognitive distortions about her body
image were significant. These new concerns resulted in a relapse of her
depressive symptoms, including suicidal ideation, and the psychiatrist
increased her citalopram to 40 mg/day. She reported severe akathisia on
this dose and refused to take any more medication, including an
antidepressant of another class. Rachel did agree to intensify her therapy
to twice weekly, and this allowed her to explore some of the conflicts,
feelings, and thoughts that fostered her treatment-refractory illness. The
psychiatrist used a combination of psychotherapy and hypnosis for this
work. Over the next 6 months, Rachel revealed a history of sexual abuse
as a child, and this made her feel that she did not “deserve” to live or to
eat and that the pain served to “punish” her for being bad. She also
admitted that she resisted the medication “psychologically” because she
felt that she did not deserve to get well. Her newly found insight, as well
as the coping skills she developed in therapy, resulted in a reduction of
her depressive symptoms, marked improvement in her eating habits with
normalization of her weight, and decreased abdominal pain. She
maintained these gains over the next year, including the normalization of


