<<<PAGE 908>>>

Seizures. Seizures can occur suddenly and without other signs of
withdrawal. About 1 percent of patients may have a single grand mal
convulsion; the rare person has multiple fits, with the peak incidence on the
second day of withdrawal.
Such patients require neurologic evaluation to rule out an independent
seizure disorder. Assuming no other cause for the seizures is found,
benzodiazepines are the treatment of choice for managing alcohol-related
seizures. Anticonvulsants, although often used (particularly before the cause
of the seizure is known), do not appear to offer additional benefit.
Mild or Moderate Withdrawal. Withdrawal develops because the brain
has physically adapted to the presence of a brain depressant and cannot
function adequately in the absence of the drug. Giving sufficient brain
depressant on the first day to diminish symptoms and then weaning the
patient off the drug over the next 5 days offers most patients optimal relief. It
also minimizes the possibility that severe withdrawal will develop. Any CNS
depressant (including benzodiazepines, barbiturates, or even alcohol) can
work, but most clinicians choose a benzodiazepine for its relative safety.
Many studies have found that benzodiazepines control most of the symptoms
associated with alcohol withdrawal. We can give adequate treatment with
either short-acting drugs (e.g., lorazepam), or long-acting substances (e.g.,
chlordiazepoxide and diazepam). We may choose to give benzodiazepines
orally or parenterally; however, we should not give intramuscular (IM)
diazepam or chlordiazepoxide as their IM absorption is erratic. We should
titrate the dosage of the benzodiazepine, starting with a high dosage and
lowering the dosage as the patient recovers. We should aim to give sufficient
benzodiazepines to keep patients calm and sedated but not so sedated that we
cannot arouse them for procedures and examinations.
Although benzodiazepines are the standard treatment for alcohol
withdrawal, studies have shown that carbamazepine in daily doses of 800 mg
is as effective as benzodiazepines and has the added benefit of minimal abuse
liability. Carbamazepine use is gradually becoming common in the United
States and Europe.
Table 4-12 gives an example of withdrawal treatment using
chlordiazepoxide. When giving a long-acting agent, such as
chlordiazepoxide, the clinician must avoid producing excessive sleepiness




<<<PAGE 918>>>

dizziness;
headache;
anxiety;
fatigue

headache; back
pain; infection;
flu syndrome;
chills;
somnolence;
decreased libido;
amnesia;
confusion

Examples of drug Opioid
No clinically
interactions
analgesics
relevant
(blocks
interactions
action);
known
yohimbine
(use with
naltrexone
increases
negative drug
effects)

Usual adult
dosage

Amitriptyline;
anticoagulants
such as
warfarin;
diazepam;
isoniazid;
metronidazole;
phenytoin;
theophylline;
warfarin; any
nonprescription
drug-containing
alcohol

Oral dose: 50
Oral dose: 666 mg Oral dose: 250
mg daily
(two 333-mg
mg daily (range
before
tablets) three
125–500 mg)
prescribing:
times daily or, for
before
evaluate for
patients with
prescribing:
possible
moderate renal
warn that the
current opioid
impairment (CrCl
patient should
use; consider
30–50 mL/min),
not take
a urine
reduce to 333
disulfiram for at
toxicology
mg (one tablet)
least 12 hr after
screen for
three times daily
drinking and
opioids,
before
that a
including
prescribing:
disulfiramsynthetic
establish
alcohol reaction




<<<PAGE 963>>>

with the benzodiazepines. Table 4-24 lists the equivalent therapeutic doses of
benzodiazepines. Even when users take grossly excessive amounts (more
than 2 g) in suicide attempts, the symptoms include only drowsiness,
lethargy, ataxia, some confusion, and mild depression of the user’s vital
signs. The most lethal overdoses occur when the user takes a benzodiazepine
in combination with other sedatives, such as alcohol. In such cases, small
doses of benzodiazepines can cause death. The availability of flumazenil, a
specific benzodiazepine antagonist, has reduced the lethality of the
benzodiazepines. Flumazenil can be used in emergency departments to
reverse the effects of benzodiazepines.
Table 4-24
Approximate
Therapeutic
Benzodiazepines

Equivalent

Doses

Generic Name

Trade Name

Dose (mg)

Alprazolam

Xanax

1

Chlordiazepoxide

Librium

25

Clonazepam

Klonopin

0.5–1.0

Clorazepate

Tranxene

15

Diazepam

Valium

10

Estazolam

Prosom

1

Flurazepam

Dalmane

30

Lorazepam

Ativan

2

Oxazepam

Serax

30

Temazepam

Restoril

20

Triazolam

Halcion

0.25

Quazepam

Doral

15

Zolpidem

Ambien

10

of




<<<PAGE 966>>>

Slow comprehension
Faulty judgment
Disinhibited sexual aggressive impulses
Narrowed range of attention
Emotional lability
Exaggerated basic personality traits
Hostility
Argumentativeness
Moroseness
Paranoid and suicidal ideation
Neurologic symptoms: nystagmus, diplopia, strabismus, ataxic gait,
positive Romberg sign, hypotonia, and decreased superficial
reflexes
Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic Withdrawal
Benzodiazepines. The severity of the withdrawal syndrome associated
with the benzodiazepines varies with the average dose and the duration of
use, but a mild withdrawal syndrome can follow even short-term use of
relatively low doses of benzodiazepines. A significant withdrawal syndrome
is likely to occur at the cessation of dosages in the range of 40 mg a day for
diazepam, for example, although 10 to 20 mg a day, taken for a month, can
also result in a withdrawal syndrome when stopping it. The onset of
withdrawal symptoms usually occurs 2 to 3 days after the cessation of use,
but with long-acting drugs, such as diazepam, the latency before onset can be
5 or 6 days. The symptoms include anxiety, dysphoria, intolerance for bright
lights and loud noises, nausea, sweating, muscle twitching, and sometimes
seizures (generally at dosages of 50 mg a day or more of diazepam). Table 426 lists the signs and symptoms of benzodiazepine withdrawal.
Barbiturates and Barbiturate-Like Substances. The withdrawal
syndrome for barbiturate and barbiturate-like substances range from mild
symptoms (e.g., anxiety, weakness, sweating, and insomnia) to severe
symptoms (e.g., seizures, delirium, cardiovascular collapse, and death).




<<<PAGE 970>>>

a. Hospitalize if there are medical or psychiatric indications, poor
social supports, or polysubstance dependence, or the patient is
unreliable.
b. Some clinicians recommend switching to longer-acting
benzodiazepine for withdrawal (e.g., diazepam, clonazepam);
others recommend stabilizing on the drug that patient was taking
or on phenobarbital.
c. After stabilization reduce dosage by 30% on the second or third
day and evaluate the response, keeping in mind that symptoms
that occur after decreases in benzodiazepines with short
elimination half-lives (e.g., lorazepam) appear sooner than with
those with longer elimination half-lives (e.g., diazepam).
d. Reduce dosage further by 10–25% every few days if tolerated.
e. Use adjunctive medications if necessary—carbamazepine, βadrenergic receptor antagonists, valproate, clonidine, and
sedative antidepressants have been used but their efficacy in
the treatment of the benzodiazepine abstinence syndrome has
not been established.
5. Detoxification from therapeutic dosages:
a. Initiate 10–25% dose reduction and evaluate response.
b. Dose, duration of therapy, and severity of anxiety influence the
rate of taper and need for adjunctive medications.
c. Most patients taking therapeutic doses have uncomplicated
discontinuation.
6. Psychological interventions may assist patients in detoxification
from benzodiazepines and in the long-term management of
anxiety.
Courtesy of Domenici A. Ciraulo, M.D., and Ofra Sarid-Segal, M.D.

Table 4-28
Pentobarbital
Withdrawal

Test

Dose

Procedure

Symptoms After Test Dose Estimated 24-Hr
of 200 mg Oral
Oral

for

Barbiturate

Estimated 24-Hr
Oral




<<<PAGE 1033>>>

5. Blurring of vision
6. Tremors
7. Incoordination
Short-term PCP intoxication can have potentially severe complications and
should be considered a psychiatric emergency. Some patients may present
within hours of ingesting PCP, but often 2 to 3 days elapse before they seek
psychiatric help. Persons who lose consciousness are brought for help earlier
than those who remain conscious. Most patients recover completely within a
day or two, but some remain psychotic for as long as 2 weeks. Patients
presenting in a coma often exhibit disorientation, hallucinations, confusion,
and difficulty communicating on regaining consciousness. These symptoms
may also occur in noncomatose patients, but their symptoms appear to be less
severe. Behavioral disturbances sometimes are severe; they can include
public masturbation, stripping off clothes, violence, urinary incontinence,
crying, and inappropriate laughing. Patients frequently have amnesia for the
entire period of the psychosis.
Police brought a 17-year-old male patient to the emergency room after
finding him disoriented on the street. As the police attempted to question
him, he became increasingly agitated; when they attempted to restrain
him, he became assaultive. Attempts to question or to examine him in the
emergency department evoked increased agitation.
Initially, it was impossible to determine vital signs or to draw blood.
Based on the observation of horizontal, vertical, and rotatory nystagmus,
clinicians made a preliminary diagnosis of PCP intoxication. Within a
few minutes of being placed in a darkened examination room, his
agitation markedly decreased. Blood pressure was 170/100; other vital
signs were within normal limits. The patient agreed to take 20 mg of
diazepam orally. Thirty minutes later, he was less agitated and could be
interviewed, although he responded to questions in a fragmented fashion
and was slightly dysarthric. He stated that he must have inadvertently
taken a larger-than-usual dose of “dust,” which he reported having used
once or twice a week for several years. He denied using any other
substance and any history of mental disorder. He was confused and




<<<PAGE 1039>>>

room.
Unspecified Hallucinogen-Related Disorder
When a patient with a hallucinogen-related disorder does not meet the criteria
for any of the standard hallucinogen-related disorders, this diagnosis may
apply. An example would be a withdrawal syndrome associated with a
hallucinogen, which has been occasionally reported, although DSM-5 does
not include this diagnosis.

TREATMENT
Hallucinogen Intoxication
The most necessary treatment is reassurance and supportive care. Patients
experiencing intense and unpleasant hallucinogen intoxication can be helped
by a quiet environment, verbal reassurance, and the passage of time. More
rapid relief of severe anxiety is likely after oral administration of 20 mg of
diazepam or a parenteral benzodiazepine if oral use is not practical. Anxiety
and other symptoms generally diminish within 20 minutes of medication
administration, compared to hours with only psychological and
environmental support; however, perceptual symptoms may persist. Patients
may need gentle restraint if they present a danger to themselves or others, but
clinicians should avoid restraints if possible. Antipsychotic medications,
particularly if given at excessive doses, may worsen symptoms and are best
avoided unless the diagnosis remains unclear and the behavior is
unmanageable. The marketing of lower doses of LSD and a more
sophisticated approach to the treatment of casualties by drug users
themselves have combined to reduce the appearance of this once-common
disorder in psychiatric treatment facilities.
Phencyclidine. Treatment of PCP intoxication aims to reduce systemic
PCP levels and to address significant medical, behavioral, and psychiatric
issues. For intoxication and PCP-induced psychotic disorder, although the
resolution of current symptoms and signs is paramount, the long-term goal of
treatment is to prevent relapse to PCP use. PCP levels can fluctuate over
many hours or even days, especially after oral administration. A prolonged




<<<PAGE 1892>>>

IV as continuous
infusion

dramatic
improvement

Electroconvulsive
therapy

Reports of good outcome
with both unilateral and
bilateral treatments;
response may occur in
as few as three
treatments

Effective when
medications
have failed; also
may treat
underlying
psychiatric
disorder

Dantrolene

1 mg/kg/day for 8 days,
then continue as PO for
7 additional days

Benefits may occur
in minutes or
hours as a
single agent or
in combination

Benzodiazepines

1–2 mg IM as test dose; if
effective, switch to PO;
consider use if
underlying disorder has
catatonic symptoms

Has been reported
effective when
other agents
have failed

Supportive
measures

IV hydration, cooling
Often effective as
blankets, ice packs, iceinitial approach
water enema,
early in the
oxygenation, antipyretics
episode

PO, orally; bid, twice a day; tid, three times a day; IV, intravenously; IM, intramuscularly.
Adapted from Davis JM, Caroif SN, Mann SC. Treatment of neuroleptic malignant syndrome.
Psychiatr Ann. 2000;30:325–331, with permission.
TREATMENT. Prophylaxis with anticholinergics or related drugs (outlined in

Table 21-3) usually prevents dystonia, although the risks of prophylactic
treatment weigh against that benefit. Treatment with intramuscular
anticholinergics or intravenous or intramuscular diphenhydramine (Benadryl)
(50 mg) almost always relieves the symptoms. Diazepam (Valium) (10 mg
intravenously), amobarbital (Amytal), caffeine sodium benzoate, and
hypnosis have also been reported to be effective. Although tolerance for the




<<<PAGE 1992>>>

(Nolvadex, Soltamox). The combined use of SSRIs and NSAIDs increases
the risk of gastric bleeding.
Table 21-17
Serotonin Syndrome Symptoms
Diarrhea

Myoclonus

Diaphoresis

Hyperactive reflexes

Tremor

Disorientation

Ataxia

Lability of mood

The SSRIs, particularly fluvoxamine, should not be used with clozapine
because it raises clozapine concentrations, increasing the risk of seizure. The
SSRIs may increase the duration and severity of zolpidem (Ambien)-induced
side effects, including hallucinations.
Fluoxetine. Fluoxetine can be administered with tricyclic drugs, but the
clinician should use low dosages of the tricyclic drug. Because the hepatic
enzyme CYP2D6 metabolizes it, fluoxetine may interfere with the
metabolism of other drugs in the 7 percent of the population who have an
inefficient isoform of this enzyme, the so-called poor metabolizers.
Fluoxetine may slow down the metabolism of carbamazepine (Tegretol),
antineoplastic agents, diazepam (Valium), and phenytoin (Dilantin). Drug
interactions have been described for fluoxetine that may affect the plasma
levels of benzodiazepines, antipsychotics, and lithium. Fluoxetine and other
SSRIs may interact with warfarin (Coumadin), increasing the risk of bleeding
and bruising.
Sertraline. Sertraline may displace warfarin from plasma proteins and may
increase the prothrombin time. The drug interaction data on sertraline support
a generally similar profile to that of fluoxetine, although sertraline does not
interact as strongly with the CYP2D6 enzyme.
Paroxetine. Paroxetine has a higher risk for drug interactions than does
either fluoxetine or sertraline because it is a more potent inhibitor of the




<<<PAGE 1993>>>

CYP2D6 enzyme. Cimetidine can increase the concentration of sertraline and
paroxetine, and phenobarbital (Luminal) and phenytoin can decrease the
concentration of paroxetine. Because of the potential for interference with the
CYP2D6 enzyme, the coadministration of paroxetine with other
antidepressants, phenothiazines, and antiarrhythmic drugs should be
undertaken with caution. Paroxetine may increase the anticoagulant effect of
warfarin. Coadministration of paroxetine and tramadol may precipitate
serotonin syndrome in elderly persons.
Fluvoxamine. Among the SSRIs, fluvoxamine appears to present the most
risk for drug–drug interactions. Fluvoxamine is metabolized by the enzyme
CYP3A4, which may be inhibited by ketoconazole (Nizoral). Fluvoxamine
may increase the half-life of alprazolam, triazolam (Halcion), and diazepam,
and it should not be coadministered with these agents. Fluvoxamine may
increase theophylline levels threefold and warfarin levels twofold, with
significant clinical consequences; thus, the serum levels of the latter drugs
should be closely monitored, and the doses adjusted accordingly.
Fluvoxamine raises concentrations and may increase the activity of clozapine,
carbamazepine, methadone (Dolophine, Methadose), propranolol (Inderal),
and diltiazem (Cardizem). Fluvoxamine has no significant interactions with
lorazepam (Ativan) or digoxin (Lanoxin).
Citalopram. Citalopram is not a potent inhibitor of any CYP enzymes.
Concurrent administration of cimetidine increases concentrations of
citalopram by about 40 percent. Citalopram does not significantly affect the
metabolism of, nor is its metabolism significantly affected by, digoxin,
lithium, warfarin, carbamazepine, or imipramine (Tofranil). Citalopram
increases the plasma concentrations of metoprolol (Lopressor) twofold, but
this usually does not affect BP or heart rate. Data on coadministration of
citalopram and potent inhibitors of CYP3A4 or CYP2D6 are not available.
Escitalopram. Escitalopram is a moderate inhibitor of CYP2D6 and has
been shown to raise desipramine (Norpramin) and metoprolol concentrations
significantly.
Vilazodone. Vilazodone dose should be reduced to 20 mg when




<<<PAGE 2077>>>

depressant (e.g., alcohol), and increased severity of extrapyramidal
symptoms, which usually responds to treatment with antiparkinsonian drugs.
Valproate can usually be safely combined with carbamazepine or SDAs.
Perhaps the most worrisome interaction of valproate and a psychotropic drug
involves lamotrigine. Since the approval of lamotrigine for the treatment of
bipolar disorder, it is more likely that patients will be treated with both
agents. Valproate more than doubles lamotrigine concentrations, increasing
the risk of a severe rash (Stevens–Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal
necrolysis).
The plasma concentrations of carbamazepine, diazepam (Valium),
amitriptyline (Elavil), nortriptyline (Pamelor), and phenobarbital (Luminal)
may also be increased when these drugs are coadministered with valproate.
Also, the plasma concentrations of phenytoin (Dilantin) and desipramine
(Norpramin) may be decreased when they are combined with valproate. The
plasma concentrations of valproate may be decreased when the drug is
coadministered with carbamazepine and may be increased when
coadministered with guanfacine (Tenex), amitriptyline, or fluoxetine
(Prozac). Valproate can be displaced from plasma proteins by carbamazepine,
diazepam, and aspirin. Persons who are treated with anticoagulants (e.g.,
aspirin and warfarin [Coumadin]) should also be monitored when valproate
use is initiated to assess the development of any undesired augmentation of
the anticoagulation effects. Interactions of valproate with other drugs are
listed in Table 21-34.
Table 21-34
Interactions of Valproate with Other Drugs
Drug

Interactions Reported with Valproate

Lithium

Increased tremor

Antipsychotics

Increased sedation; increased extrapyramidal
effects; delirium and stupor (single report)

Clozapine

Increased sedation; confusional syndrome (single
report)

Carbamazepine Acute psychosis (single report); ataxia, nausea,




<<<PAGE 2078>>>

lethargy (single report); may decrease valproate
serum concentrations
Antidepressants Amitriptyline and fluoxetine may increase valproate
serum concentrations
Diazepam

Serum concentration increased by valproate

Clonazepam

Absence status (rare; reported only in patients with
preexisting epilepsy)

Phenytoin

Serum concentration decreased by valproate

Phenobarbital

Serum concentration increased by valproate;
increased sedation

Other CNS
depressants

Increased sedation

Anticoagulants

Possible potentiation of effect

CNS, central nervous system.

Laboratory Interferences
Valproate may cause a laboratory increase of serum-free fatty acids.
Valproate metabolites may produce a false-positive test result for urinary
ketones as well as falsely abnormal thyroid function test results.
Table 21-35
Recommended Laboratory Tests during Valproate Therapy
Before Treatment
Standard chemistry screen with special attention to liver function
tests
CBC, including WBC and platelet count
During Treatment
Liver function tests at 1 mo; then every 6–24 mo if no
abnormalities are found.
Complete blood count with platelet count at 1 mo; then every 6–
24 mo if findings are normal.




<<<PAGE 2114>>>

The absorption, the attainment of peak concentrations, and the onset of
action are quickest for diazepam (Valium), lorazepam (Ativan), alprazolam
(Xanax), triazolam (Halcion), and estazolam (ProSom). The rapid onset of
effects is vital to persons who take a single dose of a benzodiazepine to calm
an episodic burst of anxiety or to fall asleep rapidly. Several benzodiazepines
are effective after intravenous (IV) injection, but only lorazepam and
midazolam (Versed) have rapid and reliable absorption after intramuscular
(IM) administration.
Diazepam, chlordiazepoxide, clonazepam (Klonopin), clorazepate,
flurazepam (Dalmane), and quazepam (Doral) have plasma half-lives of 30
hours to more than 100 hours and are technically described as long-acting
benzodiazepines. The plasma half-lives of these compounds can be as high as
200 hours in persons whose metabolism is genetically slow. Because the
attainment of steady-state plasma concentrations of the drugs can take up to 2
weeks, persons may experience symptoms and signs of toxicity after only 7
to 10 days of treatment with a dosage that seemed initially to be in the
therapeutic range.
Clinically, half-life alone does not necessarily determine the duration of
therapeutic action for most benzodiazepines. The fact that all
benzodiazepines are lipid-soluble to varying degrees means that
benzodiazepines and their active metabolites bind to plasma proteins. The
extent of this binding is proportional to their lipid solubility. The amount of
protein binding varies from 70 to 99 percent. Distribution, onset, and
termination of action after a single dose are thus determined mainly by
benzodiazepine lipid solubility, not elimination half-life. Preparations with
high lipid solubility, such as diazepam and alprazolam, are absorbed rapidly
from the GI tract and distribute rapidly to the brain by passive diffusion along
a concentration gradient, resulting in a rapid onset of action. However, as the
concentration of the medication increases in the brain and decreases in the
bloodstream, the concentration gradient reverses itself, and these medications
leave the brain rapidly, resulting in fast cessation of drug effect. Drugs with
longer elimination half-lives, such as diazepam, may remain in the
bloodstream for a substantially more extended time than their actual
pharmacologic action at benzodiazepine receptors because the concentration
in the brain decreases rapidly below the level necessary for a noticeable
effect.




<<<PAGE 2115>>>

In contrast, lorazepam, which has a shorter elimination half-life than
diazepam but is less lipid-soluble, has a slower onset of action after a single
dose because the drug is absorbed and enters the brain more slowly.
However, the duration of action after a single dose is longer because it takes
longer for lorazepam to leave the brain and for brain levels to decrease below
the concentration that produces an effect. In chronic dosing, some of these
differences are not as apparent because brain levels are in equilibrium with
higher and more consistent steady-state blood levels, but additional doses still
produce a more rapid but briefer action with diazepam than with lorazepam.
Benzodiazepines are distributed widely in adipose tissue. As a result,
medications may persist in the body after discontinuation longer than would
be predicted from their elimination half-lives. Also, the dynamic half-life
(i.e., duration of action on the receptor) may be longer than the elimination
half-life.
The advantages of long–half-life drugs over short–half-life drugs include
less frequent dosing, less variation in plasma concentration, and less severe
withdrawal phenomena. The disadvantages include drug accumulation,
increased risk of daytime psychomotor impairment, and increased daytime
sedation.
The half-lives of lorazepam, oxazepam (Serax), temazepam (Restoril), and
estazolam are between 8 and 30 hours. Alprazolam has a half-life of 10 to 15
hours, and triazolam has the shortest half-life (2 to 3 hours) of all the orally
administered benzodiazepines. Rebound insomnia and anterograde amnesia
are thought to be more of a problem with the short–half-life drugs than with
the long–half-life drugs.
Because the administration of medications more frequently than the
elimination half-life leads to drug accumulation, medications such as
diazepam and flurazepam accumulate with daily dosing, eventually resulting
in increased daytime sedation.
Some benzodiazepines (e.g., oxazepam) are conjugated directly by
glucuronidation and are excreted. Most benzodiazepines are oxidized first by
CYP3A4 and CYP2C19, often to active metabolites. These metabolites may
then be hydroxylated to another active metabolite. For example, diazepam is
oxidized to desmethyldiazepam, which, in turn, is hydroxylated to produce
oxazepam. These products undergo glucuronidation to inactive metabolites.
Several benzodiazepines (e.g., diazepam, chlordiazepoxide) have the same




<<<PAGE 2117>>>

of panic disorder, benzodiazepines have the advantage of working quickly
and not causing significant sexual dysfunction and weight gain. However, the
SSRIs are still often preferred because they target common comorbid
conditions, such as depression or OCD. Benzodiazepines and SSRIs can be
initiated together to treat acute panic symptoms; use of the benzodiazepine
can be tapered after 3 to 4 weeks once the therapeutic benefits of the SSRI
have emerged.
SOCIAL ANXIETY DISORDER. Clonazepam is an effective treatment for social

anxiety disorder. Also, several other benzodiazepines (e.g., diazepam) have
been used as adjunctive medications for the treatment of social anxiety
disorder.
Benzodiazepines are used adjunctively for
treatment of adjustment disorder with anxiety, pathologic anxiety associated
with life events (e.g., after an accident), OCD, and PTSD.
OTHER ANXIETY DISORDERS.

ANXIETY ASSOCIATED WITH DEPRESSION. Depressed patients often experience

significant anxiety, and antidepressant drugs may cause initial exacerbation
of these symptoms. Accordingly, benzodiazepines are indicated for the
treatment of anxiety associated with depression.
Bipolar I and II Disorders
Clonazepam, lorazepam, and alprazolam are useful in the management of
acute manic episodes and as an adjuvant to maintenance therapy instead of
antipsychotics. As an adjuvant to lithium (Eskalith) or lamotrigine
(Lamictal), clonazepam may result in an increased time between cycles and
fewer depressive episodes. Benzodiazepines may help patients with bipolar
disorder sleep better.
Catatonia. Lorazepam, sometimes in low doses (less than 5 mg/day) and
sometimes in very high doses (12 mg/day or more), is regularly used to treat
acute catatonia, which is more frequently associated with bipolar disorder
than with schizophrenia. Other benzodiazepines have also been said to be
helpful. However, there are no valid controlled trials of benzodiazepines in
catatonia. Chronic catatonia does not respond as well to benzodiazepines.




<<<PAGE 2123>>>

The clinical decision to treat an anxious person with a benzodiazepine should
be carefully considered. Medical causes of anxiety (e.g., thyroid dysfunction,
caffeinism, and prescription medications) should be ruled out.
Benzodiazepine use should be started at a low dosage, and the person should
be instructed regarding the drug’s sedative properties and abuse potential. An
estimated length of therapy should be decided at the beginning of therapy,
and the need for continued therapy should be reevaluated at least monthly
because of the problems associated with long-term use. However, certain
persons with anxiety disorders are unresponsive to treatments other than
benzodiazepines in long-term use.
Benzodiazepines are available in a wide range of formulations.
Clonazepam is available in a wafer formulation that facilitates its use in
patients who have trouble swallowing pills. Alprazolam is available in an
extended-release form, which reduces the frequency of dosing. Some
benzodiazepines are more potent than others in that one compound requires a
relatively smaller dosage than another compound to achieve the same effect.
For example, clonazepam requires 0.25 mg to achieve the same effect as 5
mg of diazepam; thus, clonazepam is considered a high-potency
benzodiazepine. Conversely, oxazepam has an approximate dosage
equivalence of 15 mg and is a low-potency drug.
Table 21-43 lists preparations and doses of medications discussed in this
chapter.

BUSPIRONE
Buspirone hydrochloride (BuSpar) is classified as an azapirone and is
chemically distinct from other psychotropic agents. It acts on two types of
receptors, serotonin (5-HT) and dopamine (D). It has a high affinity for the 5HT1A serotonin receptor, acting as an agonist or partial agonist, and moderate
affinity for the D2 dopamine receptor, acting as both an agonist and an
antagonist. The approved indication for this psychotropic drug is for the
treatment of GAD. It was initially believed to be a better alternative to the
benzodiazepine drug group because buspirone does not possess
anticonvulsant and muscle relaxant effects. Reports continue to appear that
some patients benefit from the addition of buspirone to their antidepressant
regimen. Its use in this role is more common than its use as an anxiolytic.




<<<PAGE 2135>>>

Seizures. Phenobarbital (Solfoton, Luminal), the most commonly used
barbiturate for treatment of seizures, has indications for the treatment of
generalized tonic–clonic and simple partial seizures. Parenteral barbiturates
are used in the emergency management of seizures independent of cause.
Intravenous phenobarbital should be administered slowly at 10 to 20 mg/kg
for status epilepticus.
Narcoanalysis. Amobarbital (Amytal) has been used historically as a
diagnostic aid in several clinical conditions, including conversion reactions,
catatonia, hysterical stupor, and unexplained muteness, and to differentiate
stupor of depression, schizophrenia, and structural brain lesions.
The Amytal interview is performed by placing the patient in a reclining
position and administering amobarbital IV at 50 mg a minute. Infusion is
continued until lateral nystagmus is sustained or drowsiness is noted, usually
at 75 to 150 mg. After this, 25 to 50 mg can be administered every 5 minutes
to maintain narcosis. The patient should be allowed to rest for 15 to 30
minutes after the interview before attempting to walk.
Because of the risk of laryngospasm with IV amobarbital, diazepam has
become the drug of choice for narcoanalysis.
Sleep. The barbiturates reduce sleep latency and the number of awakenings
during sleep, although tolerance to these effects generally develops within 2
weeks. Discontinuation of barbiturates often leads to rebound increases in
electroencephalographic measures of sleep and a worsening of insomnia.
Withdrawal from Sedative-Hypnotics
Barbiturates are sometimes used to determine the extent of tolerance to
barbiturates or other hypnotics to guide detoxification. After intoxication has
been resolved, a test dose of pentobarbital (200 mg) is given orally. One hour
later, the patient is examined. Tolerance and dose requirements are
determined by the degree to which the patient is affected. If the patient is not
sedated, another 100 mg of pentobarbital can be administered every 2 hours,
up to three times (maximum, 500 mg over 6 hours). The amount needed for
mild intoxication corresponds to the approximate daily dose of barbiturate
used. Phenobarbital (30 mg) may then be substituted for each 100 mg of
pentobarbital. This daily dose requirement can be administered in divided




<<<PAGE 2187>>>

β-hydroxylase, the enzyme that metabolizes dopamine into norepinephrine
and epinephrine, and thus may exacerbate psychosis in persons with
psychotic disorders. Catatonic reactions may also occur.
Drug Interactions. Disulfiram increases the blood concentration of
diazepam (Valium), paraldehyde, phenytoin (Dilantin), caffeine,
tetrahydrocannabinol (the active ingredient in marijuana), barbiturates,
anticoagulants, isoniazid (Nydrazid), and tricyclic drugs. Disulfiram should
not be administered concomitantly with paraldehyde because paraldehyde is
metabolized to acetaldehyde in the liver.
Laboratory Interferences. In rare instances, disulfiram has been reported
to interfere with the incorporation of iodine-131 into protein-bound iodine.
Disulfiram may reduce urinary concentrations of homovanillic acid, the
major metabolite of dopamine, because it inhibits dopamine hydroxylase.
Dosage and Clinical Guidelines. Disulfiram is supplied in 250- and 500mg tablets. The usual initial dosage is 500 mg a day, taken by mouth for the
first 1 or 2 weeks, followed by a maintenance dosage of 250 mg a day. The
dosage should not exceed 500 mg a day. The maintenance dosage range is
125 to 500 mg a day.
Persons taking disulfiram must be instructed that the ingestion of even the
smallest amount of alcohol will bring on a disulfiram–alcohol reaction, with
all of its unpleasant effects. Also, persons should be warned against ingesting
any alcohol-containing preparations, such as cough drops, tonics of any kind,
and alcohol-containing foods and sauces. Some reactions have occurred in
patients who used alcohol-based lotions, toilet water, colognes, or perfumes
and inhaled the fumes; therefore, precautions must be explicit and should
include any topically applied preparations containing alcohol, such as
perfume.
Disulfiram should not be administered until the person has abstained from
alcohol for at least 12 hours. Persons should be warned that the disulfiram–
alcohol reaction may occur as long as 1 or 2 weeks after the last dose of
disulfiram. Persons taking disulfiram should carry identification cards
describing the disulfiram–alcohol reaction and listing the name and telephone
number of the physician to be called.




<<<PAGE 2310>>>

patient’s jaw and facial muscles, is seen concurrently with the flow of
stimulus current, regardless of whether a seizure occurs. The first behavioral
sign of the seizure is often a plantar extension, which lasts 10 to 20 seconds
and marks the tonic phase. This phase is followed by rhythmic (i.e., clonic)
contractions that decrease in frequency and finally disappear. The tonic phase
is marked by high-frequency, sharp EEG activity on which a higherfrequency muscle artifact may be superimposed. During the clonic phase,
bursts of polyspike activity coincide with the muscular contractions but
usually persist for at least a few seconds after the clonic movements stop.
MONITORING SEIZURES. A physician must have an objective measure that a

bilateral generalized seizure has occurred after the stimulation. The physician
should be able to observe either some evidence of tonic–clonic movements or
electrophysiologic evidence of seizure activity from the EEG or
electromyogram (EMG). Seizures with unilateral ECT are asymmetrical, with
higher ictal EEG amplitudes over the stimulated hemisphere than over the
nonstimulated hemisphere. Occasionally, unilateral seizures are induced; for
this reason, at least a single pair of EEG electrodes should be placed over the
contralateral hemisphere when using unilateral ECT. For a seizure to be
effective in the course of ECT, it should last at least 25 seconds.
FAILURE TO INDUCE SEIZURES. If a particular stimulus fails to cause a seizure

of sufficient duration, up to four attempts at seizure induction can be tried
during a course of treatment. The onset of seizure activity is sometimes
delayed as long as 20 to 40 seconds after the stimulus administration. If a
stimulus fails to result in a seizure, the contact between the electrodes and the
skin should be checked, and the intensity of the stimulus should be increased
by 25 to 100 percent. The clinician can also change the anesthetic agent to
minimize increases in the seizure threshold caused by the anesthetic.
Additional procedures to lower the seizure threshold include hyperventilation
and administration of 500 to 2,000 mg IV of caffeine sodium benzoate 5 to
10 minutes before the stimulus.
Prolonged seizures (seizures lasting
more than 180 seconds) and status epilepticus can be terminated either with
additional doses of the barbiturate anesthetic agent or with IV diazepam (5 to
PROLONGED AND TARDIVE SEIZURES.




<<<PAGE 2560>>>

in time, they reach their understanding.
In an emergency, as in any other psychiatric situation, when a clinician
does not know what to say, the best approach is to listen. Persons in crisis
reveal how much they need support, denial, ventilation, and words to
conceptualize the meaning of their crisis and to discover paths to resolution.
Pharmacotherapy
The primary indications for the use of psychotropic medication in an
emergency room include violent or assaultive behavior, massive anxiety or
panic, and extrapyramidal reactions, such as dystonia and akathisia as
adverse effects of psychiatric drugs. Laryngospasm is a rare form of dystonia,
and psychiatrists should be prepared to maintain an open airway with
intubation if necessary.
Persons who are delusional or in a state of catatonic excitement require
tranquilization. Episodic outbursts of violence may respond to antipsychotics
(haloperidol, second-generation antipsychotics), benzodiazepines and
antihistamines. If history suggests a seizure disorder, use clinical studies to
confirm the diagnosis and evaluation to ascertain the cause. If the findings are
positive, anticonvulsant therapy is initiated, or appropriate surgery is
provided (e.g., in the case of a cerebral mass). Conservative measures may
suffice for intoxication from drugs of abuse. Sometimes, drugs such as
haloperidol (5 to 10 mg every half-hour to an hour) are needed until a patient
is stabilized. Benzodiazepines may be used instead of, or in addition to,
antipsychotics (to reduce the antipsychotic dosage). When a recreational drug
has strong anticholinergic properties, benzodiazepines are more appropriate
than antipsychotics.
Violent, struggling patients are subdued most effectively with an
appropriate sedative or antipsychotic. Diazepam (5 to 10 mg) or lorazepam (2
to 4 mg) may be given slowly intravenously (IV) over 2 minutes. Clinicians
must give IV medication with great care to avoid respiratory arrest. Patients
who require IM medication can be sedated with haloperidol (5 to 10 mg IM).
If the furor is caused by alcohol or is part of a postseizure psychomotor
disturbance, the sleep produced by a relatively small amount of an IV
medication may go on for hours. On awakening, patients are often entirely
alert and rational and typically have complete amnesia about the violent




<<<PAGE 2561>>>

episode.
If the disturbance is part of an ongoing psychotic process and returns as
soon as the IV medication wears off, continuous medication may be given. It
is sometimes better to use small IM or oral doses at half-hour to 1-hour
intervals (e.g., haloperidol, 2 to 5 mg, or diazepam, 20 mg) until the patient is
controlled than to use large dosages initially, which can result in an
overmedicated patient. As the disturbing behavior is brought under control,
successively smaller and less frequent doses should be used. During the
preliminary treatment, a patient’s blood pressure and other vital signs should
be monitored.
Restraints
Restraints are used when patients are so dangerous to themselves or others
that they pose a severe threat that cannot be controlled in any other way.
Patients may be restrained temporarily to receive medication or for long
periods if we cannot use medications. Usually, patients in restraints quiet
down after a time. On a psychodynamic level, such patients may even
welcome the control of their impulses provided by restraints. Table 25-11
provides a summary of the use of restraints.
Disposition
In some cases, the usual option of admitting or discharging the patient is not
considered optimal. Suspected toxic psychoses, brief decompensations in a
patient with a personality disorder, and adjustment reactions to traumatic
events, for example, may be best managed in an extended-observation
setting. Allowing the patient more time in a secure environment can result in
sufficient improvement or clarification of the issues to make traditional
inpatient treatment unnecessary. It can also spare the patient the trauma and
stigma of psychiatric admission and can free up bed space for needier
patients. Crisis intervention for victims of rape and other traumas can also be
done in an extended-observation setting.
When the decision is to admit the patient to the hospital, it is preferable to
do so voluntarily. Allowing patients that option gives them a sense of control
over their lives and of participation in the treatment decisions. Patients who
meet involuntary admission criteria based on dangerousness to themselves or


