<<<PAGE 412>>>

It consists of seven interactive computer games that target changes in facial
expression, attention to the eye region of the face, holistic face recognition,
and identifying emotional expression. An RCT of this program with children
with autism spectrum disorder provided evidence that after 20 hours of face
training with Let’s Face It!, compared to the control group, the trained
children demonstrated improvement in their ability to focus on the eye region
of a face and improved their analytic and holistic face-processing skills.
Several studies using virtual reality environments to teach children with
autism spectrum disorder social skills and interaction have provided evidence
of their value. In one study, a virtual café for children with autism spectrum
disorder allowed the children to practice ordering and paying for drinks and
food by navigation with the use of a computer mouse.
Psychopharmacological Interventions
Psychopharmacological interventions in autism spectrum disorder help
ameliorate behavioral symptoms rather than core features of autism spectrum
disorder. Target symptoms include irritability, broadly including aggression,
temper tantrums, and self-injurious behaviors, hyperactivity, impulsivity, and
inattention.
Irritability. Two second-generation antipsychotics, risperidone, and
aripiprazole, have been approved by the Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) in the United States for treatment of irritability in individuals with
autism spectrum disorder. Risperidone, a high-potency antipsychotic with
combined dopamine (D2) and serotonin (5-HT2) receptor antagonist
properties, has been shown to subdue aggressive or self-injurious behaviors
in children with and without autism spectrum disorder. There have been
seven RCTs, three reanalysis studies, and two add-on studies, which have
converged to confirm risperidone as an efficacious pharmacologic treatment
for irritability in children and adolescents with autism spectrum disorder.
Typical doses range from 0.5 to 1.5 mg. Some of the preschoolers in this
study were also receiving intensive behavioral treatments. Risperidone is
considered the first-line of medication treatment for children and adolescents
with autism spectrum disorder who exhibit severe irritability. Despite its
efficacy, risperidone’s main side effects of weight gain and increased




<<<PAGE 413>>>

appetite, metabolic side effects such as hyperglycemia, prolactin elevation,
and dyslipidemia, along with other common adverse effects such as fatigue,
drowsiness, dizziness, and drooling, have limited its use in some individuals.
Risperidone should be used with caution in individuals with underlying
cardiac abnormalities or hypotension, since risperidone may contribute to
orthostatic hypotension. In further continuation studies of risperidone in the
treatment of irritability in autism spectrum disorder, persistent efficacy and
tolerability were found over 6 months, with a rapid return of symptoms in
good responders when discontinuing the risperidone. Other drugs studied in
the treatment of irritability in autism spectrum disorder include aripiprazole
and olanzapine.
Two extensive studies utilizing aripiprazole in the treatment of tantrums,
aggression, and self-injury in children and adolescents with autism spectrum
disorder found that aripiprazole was both efficacious and safe. Doses ranged
from 5 to 15 mg/day. The main side effects included sedation, dizziness,
insomnia, akathisia, nausea, and vomiting. Although weight gain was not as
pronounced as with risperidone, it was still considered a moderate adverse
event, with approximately 1.3 to 1.5 kg gained during an 8-week study
period. The weight gain was similar at the lower and higher doses.
Olanzapine, which blocks 5-HT2A and D2 receptors and also blocks
muscarinic receptors, has been studied in children and adolescents with
autism spectrum disorder for the treatment of irritability with a trend toward a
positive response; however, significant weight gain of approximately 3.5 kg
occurred. The main side effect was sedation.
Hyperactivity, Impulsivity, and Inattention. There have been several
randomized placebo-controlled trials of methylphenidate for the treatment of
hyperactivity, impulsivity, and inattention in children and adolescents with
autism spectrum disorder. The Research Units of Pediatric
Psychopharmacology found methylphenidate to be at least moderately
efficacious at doses of 0.25 to 0.5 mg/kg for youth with autism spectrum
disorder and ADHD symptoms. The efficacy of methylphenidate in this
population was less effective than in children with ADHD without autism
spectrum disorder, and children with autism spectrum disorder developed
more frequent side effects, including increased irritability, compared to
ADHD children. A study of methylphenidate in the treatment of hyperactivity




<<<PAGE 414>>>

and inattention in preschoolers with autism spectrum disorder found the
stimulant safe and relatively efficacious; half of the preschoolers developed
side effects including increased stereotypies, gastrointestinal upset, sleep
problems, and emotional lability. Among nonstimulants, one double-blind
placebo-controlled study of hyperactivity, impulsivity, and inattention using
atomoxetine in children with autism spectrum disorder found that it was
significantly more effective than placebo. Side effects included sedation,
irritability, constipation, and nausea. Clonidine, an α-agonist, has also been
studied in children with autism spectrum disorder for the treatment of
hyperactivity with mixed results. Guanfacine may also help in some cases.
Repetitive and Stereotypic Behavior. Antidepressants and mood
stabilizers have been studied for the treatment of these core symptoms of
autism spectrum disorder. One study with fluoxetine found the medication
group only slightly better and not significantly better than the placebo group
regarding the target symptoms, and another trial with escitalopram found no
difference between groups. Risperidone, however, was found to be effective
in targeting irritability, and restrictive and repetitive behaviors were
improved. One study using valproate in a 12-week trial with 55 children with
a mean age of 9½ years with autism spectrum disorder found that those who
were considered responders to irritability also spent less time engaging in
repetitive behaviors.
Agents Administered for Behavioral Impairment in Autism
Spectrum Disorder Based On Open Trials. Quetiapine is an
antipsychotic with more potent 5-HT2A than D2 receptor blocking properties.
Although there are only open-label trials with this agent, some experts use
this when risperidone and olanzapine fail or are intolerable. Doses range from
50 to 200 mg/day. Adverse effects include drowsiness, tachycardia, agitation,
and weight gain.
Clozapine has a heterocyclic chemical structure that is related to certain
first-generation antipsychotics, such as loxapine, although clozapine carries a
lower risk of extrapyramidal symptoms. It is not generally used in the
treatment of aggression and self-injurious behavior unless those behaviors
coexist with psychotic symptoms. The most severe adverse effect is
agranulocytosis, which necessitates monitoring white blood cell count weekly




<<<PAGE 503>>>

was able to manage the urge without performing the tic. The treatment
team referred Jake to a child and adolescent psychiatrist who decided to
re-start the Concerta at 36 mg/day and titrated it back up to 54 mg/day
without worsening of the tics. Jake responded well to his behavioral
therapy, and over 8 weeks, he had learned how to become aware of the
urges that occurred before his tics and to replace his usual tics with lessdistressing and less-disruptive behaviors.
However, when Jake entered the seventh grade, he had an exacerbation
of his motor and vocal tics and was also touching objects repeatedly
throughout the day. Jake again became despondent, not wanting to go to
school. It was decided by his psychologist to add relaxation training to
his behavioral treatment, and his child and adolescent psychiatrist added
another medication to his pharmacologic regimen. His psychiatrist
prescribed risperidone, 0.5 mg/day, which was titrated up to 1 mg twice
daily. Jake became stabilized within a month and was able to continue in
his school and even went to some parties. Jake and his parents understood
the waxing and waning nature of his tics and were hopeful that they
would begin to see some decrease in his tic symptoms within the next
few years. At follow-up, when Jake was 15 years of age, Jake had
minimal tic symptoms; an occasional eye blink and rare throat clearing
was all that was observable. Jake was not currently in behavioral
treatment. However, over the years, he had, on a few occasions, received
some booster therapy sessions to brush up on his habit reversal training
when he had a minor exacerbation of tics. Jake had been taken off his
risperidone 2 years before without exacerbation of tics. Jake continued
well controlled on Concerta, did well in school, and became more
popular after joining the soccer team. (Adapted from L. Scahill M.S.N.,
Ph.D. and J.F. Leckman, M.D.)
Table 2-23
Clinical Assessment Tools in Tic Disorders
Domain

Type

Reliability Sensitive
and
to
Validity
Change




<<<PAGE 511>>>

affinity for dopamine D2 and serotonin 5-HT2 receptors, is the most wellstudied atypical antipsychotic in the treatment of tics. There is considerable
evidence for its efficacy. Multiple randomized, controlled studies in children
and adolescents have shown favorable results compared to placebo as well as
in head-to-head studies with the typical antipsychotics haloperidol and
pimozide. Risperidone was associated with fewer adverse events compared to
typical antipsychotics; however, it can cause weight gain, metabolic side
effects, and hyperprolactinemia. In a randomized, double-blind, parallelgroup study of Tourette disorder comparing risperidone to pimozide,
risperidone showed superiority in reducing comorbid obsessive-compulsive
symptoms as well as reducing tics. In other randomized clinical trials,
risperidone reduced tics in children, adolescents, and adults with mean daily
doses of 2.5 mg with a range of 1 to 6 mg.
Haloperidol and pimozide are the two most well-investigated and FDAapproved antipsychotic agents in the treatment of Tourette disorder.
However, atypical antipsychotics such as risperidone are often first-line
agents due to their safer side-effect profiles. Both haloperidol and pimozide
are efficacious in multiple randomized clinical trials in the treatment of
Tourette disorder. Both haloperidol and pimozide present significant risks for
extrapyramidal side effects; in a long-term naturalistic follow-up study,
haloperidol produces more significant acute dyskinesia and dystonia
compared to pimozide.
A third typical antipsychotic, fluphenazine, has been used in the United
States for many years in the treatment of tic disorders in the absence of robust
data supporting its efficacy. A small controlled study of fluphenazine,
trifluphenazine, and haloperidol found similar reductions in tics; however,
haloperidol has more extrapyramidal side effects and more sedation. The
frequency of sedation, dystonia, and akathisia of typical antipsychotics,
probably due to their predominant dopaminergic blockade in the nigrostriatal
pathways, limits their use and increases the appeal of the atypical
antipsychotics. Risperidone and pimozide had equal efficacy in one study of
children, adolescents, and adults with Tourette disorder.
Aripiprazole has become a pharmacologic agent of interest in the treatment
of tic disorders due to its mode of action; in addition to its D2 receptor
antagonistic actions, aripiprazole is also a partial D2 and 5-HT1A receptor




<<<PAGE 552>>>

controlled study of sertraline to prevent PTSD found that children who
received sertraline, flexibly dosed between 25 and 150 mg/day, had a
decrease in parent-reported symptoms of PTSD over 8 weeks compared to a
placebo group. Among the child-reported symptoms, however, there was no
significant difference between the two groups.
Psychiatrists sometimes use antiadrenergic agents to treat dysregulation of
the noradrenergic system in adults and youth with PTSD. α2-Agonists such as
clonidine and guanfacine, for example, have been used to decrease
norepinephrine release, whereas centrally acting β-antagonists such as
propranolol, and α1-antagonists such as prazosin, are hypothesized to
improve hyperarousal and intrusive thoughts through attenuation of
norepinephrine postsynaptically. Although there are some data in adults with
PTSD to support the use of these agents, there are mainly case reports for
youths. There is a suggestion that guanfacine may reduce nightmares in
children with PTSD and that clonidine may diminish symptoms of
reenactment of traumatic events in children. One report of propranolol
treatment in 11 pediatric patients with PTSD from sexual or physical abuse
with a mean age of 8.5 years, who exhibited agitation and hyperarousal,
indicated some decrease in symptoms in 8 of the 11 children studied. Another
open study of transdermal clonidine treatment of preschoolers with PTSD
suggests that clonidine may be efficacious in this population in decreasing
activation and hyperarousal. An additional open trial of oral clonidine with
dosage ranges of 0.05 to 0.1 mg twice daily similarly suggests that this
medication may provide some relief for the symptoms of hyperarousal,
impulsivity, and agitation in young children with PTSD.
Second-generation antipsychotics such as risperidone, olanzapine,
quetiapine, ziprasidone, and aripiprazole have been studied in adults with
PTSD with mixed results. Risperidone and aripiprazole both have FDA
approval for use in children and adolescents with aggression, severe
behavioral dyscontrol, and severe psychiatric disorders; however, there are no
controlled trials with children with PTSD. For example, there is one case
series of three preschool-age children who exhibited symptoms of acute
stress disorder and who had severe thermal burns improved after being
treated with risperidone.
In children and adolescents with PTSD, there is one open-label trial of




<<<PAGE 613>>>

of school-age children. School settings can also use behavioral techniques to
promote socially acceptable behavior toward peers and to discourage covert
antisocial incidents.
Psychopharmacologic
Interventions.
The
efficacy
of
psychopharmacologic interventions includes several placebo-controlled
studies of risperidone for aggression in youth associated with disruptive
behavior disorders or mental retardation. Also, risperidone is superior to
placebo in reducing aggressive behavior in a large 6-month placebosubstitution study. One randomized, double-blind placebo-controlled trial
with quetiapine also showed efficacy for aggressive behavior. Early studies
of antipsychotics, most notably haloperidol, reported decreased aggressive
and assaultive behaviors in children with a variety of psychiatric disorders.
Atypical antipsychotics risperidone, olanzapine, quetiapine, ziprasidone, and
aripiprazole have generally replaced the older antipsychotics in clinical
practice due to their comparable efficacy and improved side effect profiles.
Side effects of second-generation antipsychotics include sedation, increased
prolactin levels (with risperidone use), and extrapyramidal symptoms,
including akathisia. In general, however, the atypical antipsychotics appear to
be well tolerated. A study of sodium valproate in youth with conduct disorder
showed that those who responded most robustly exhibited aggression
characterized by agitation, dysphoria, and distress. Although early trials
suggested that carbamazepine was useful to control aggression, a doubleblind, placebo-controlled study did not show the superiority of
carbamazepine over placebo in decreasing aggression. A pilot study found
that clonidine may decrease aggression. The SSRIs, including fluoxetine,
sertraline, paroxetine, and citalopram, are used clinically to target symptoms
of impulsivity, irritability, and mood lability, which frequently accompany
conduct disorder. Conduct disorder often coexists with ADHD, learning
disorders, and, over time, mood disorders, and substance-related disorders;
thus, we also need to treat concurrent disorders.
Epidemiology
In the United States, conduct disorder ranges from 6 to 16 percent for males,
and from 2 to 9 percent for females. The ratio of conduct disorder in males




<<<PAGE 665>>>

social skills deficits, attention deficits, and academic difficulties that often
accompany childhood-onset schizophrenia.
Pharmacotherapy
Second-generation antipsychotics, serotonin-dopamine antagonists, are the
current mainstay pharmacologic treatments for children and adolescents with
schizophrenia. Current data include six randomized clinical trials in youth
investigating the efficacy of second-generation antipsychotics for early-onset
schizophrenia, with limited support for one agent over the others. Although
clozapine, a serotonin receptor antagonist with some dopamine (D2)
antagonism, may be more effective in reducing positive and negative
symptoms, it remains a choice of last resort in youth based on its side effects.
To date, however, evidence from multisite randomized clinical trials supports
some efficacy of risperidone, olanzapine, aripiprazole, and clozapine in the
treatment of childhood- and adolescent-onset schizophrenia. Two randomized
clinical trials using risperidone in adolescents with schizophrenia found
risperidone at doses up to 3 mg/day to be superior to placebo. A multisite
randomized 6-week controlled trial of olanzapine in adolescents with
schizophrenia found that it was more efficacious than a placebo. An RCT of
aripiprazole at two fixed doses found that it was superior to placebo in the
treatment of positive symptoms of adolescent schizophrenia; however, more
than 40 percent of subjects in the active medication group did not achieve
remission. Finally, clozapine is more effective than haloperidol in improving
both positive and negative symptoms in treatment-resistant schizophrenia in
youth. More recently, a study compared clozapine to high doses of
olanzapine and found that response rates were about twice as high for
clozapine as olanzapine (66 percent vs. 33 percent) when the investigators
defined response as 30 percent or better reduction in symptoms on the Brief
Psychiatric Rating Scale and improvement on the Clinical Global Impression
Scale. The Treatment of Early-Onset Schizophrenia Spectrum Disorders
Study compared the efficacy of risperidone and olanzapine with those of
molindone, a mid-potency first-generation antipsychotic. In this study,
lacking a placebo group, each of these agents provided a similar therapeutic
effect; however, fewer than half of the patients responded optimally. Despite
the limited randomized controlled studies of second-generation




<<<PAGE 666>>>

antipsychotics for the treatment of schizophrenia in youth, the FDA is
progressively approving the use of these agents for pediatric schizophrenia
and bipolar illness. In 2007, the FDA approved the use of risperidone and
aripiprazole for the treatment of schizophrenia in 13- to 17-year-olds. The
FDA approved the use of olanzapine and quetiapine in 2009 for the treatment
of schizophrenia in 13- to 17-year-olds. Lurasidone and paliperidone were
approved by the FDA in 2017 for the treatment of schizophrenia in
adolescents.
A double-blind, randomized 8-week controlled trial compared the efficacy
and safety of olanzapine to clozapine in childhood-onset schizophrenia.
Children with childhood-onset schizophrenia who were resistant to at least
two previous treatments with antipsychotics were randomized to treatment
for 8 weeks with either olanzapine or clozapine followed by a 2-year openlabel follow-up. Using the Clinical Global Impression of Severity of
Symptoms Scale and Schedule for the Assessment of Negative/Positive
Symptoms, clozapine was associated with a significant reduction in all
outcome measures. In contrast, olanzapine showed improvement on some
measures but not on all. The only statistically significant measure in which
clozapine was superior to olanzapine was in alleviating negative symptoms
compared with baseline. Clozapine was associated with more adverse events,
such as lipid abnormalities and a seizure in one patient.
Several studies have provided evidence that risperidone, a benzisoxazole
derivative, is as effective as the older high-potency first-generation
antipsychotics, such as haloperidol, and causes less frequent severe side
effects in the treatment of schizophrenia in older adolescents and adults.
Published case reports and limited more extensive controlled studies have
supported the efficacy of risperidone in the treatment of psychosis in children
and adolescents. Risperidone can cause weight gain and dystonic reactions
and other extrapyramidal adverse effects in children and adolescents.
Olanzapine is generally well tolerated for extrapyramidal adverse effects
compared with first-generation antipsychotics and risperidone, but it is
associated with moderate sedation and significant weight gain.
Psychosocial Interventions
Psychosocial interventions aimed at family education and patient and family




<<<PAGE 750>>>

Risperidone

0.5–1 mg a EPS concerns
day

Limited data in
delirium

Olanzapine

5–10 mg a
day

Higher mortality
in dementia
patients

Quetiapine

25–150 mg More sedating
a day

Metabolic
syndrome

Benzodiazepine
Lorazepam

0.5–3 mg a Respiratory
day and
depression,
as
paradoxical
needed
agitation
every 4
hr

Best use in
delirium
secondary to
alcohol or
benzodiazepine
withdrawal
Can worsen other
types of
delirium

EPIDEMIOLOGY
Delirium is a common disorder, with most incidence and prevalence rates
reported in elderly adults. In community studies, 1 percent of elderly persons
age 55 years or older have delirium (13 percent in the age 85 years and older
group in the community). Among elderly emergency department patients, 5
to 10 percent have delirium. At the time of admission to medical wards,
between 15 and 21 percent of older patients meet the criteria for deliriumprevalent cases. Of patients free of delirium at the time of hospital admission,
5 to 30 percent reported subsequent incidences of delirium during
hospitalization. Delirium occurs in 10 to 15 percent of general surgical
patients, 30 percent of open-heart surgery patients, and more than 50 percent
of patients treated for hip fractures. Delirium occurs in 70 to 87 percent of
intensive care unit patients and up to 83 percent of all patients receiving end
of life care. Sixty percent of patients in nursing homes or post-acute care




<<<PAGE 1681>>>

problem
No obvious nonpharmacologic
precipitant
Dissipates with drug
discontinuation
Antipsychotic drugs and
ejaculatory problems

Perphenazine
Chlorpromazine
Trifluoperazine
Haloperidol
Mesoridazine
Chlorprothixene

Antipsychotic drugs and priapism

Perphenazine
Mesoridazine
Chlorpromazine
Thioridazine
Fluphenazine
Molindone
Risperidone
Clozapine

Table by R. T. Seagraves, M.D.

Because depression is associated with decreased libido, varying levels of
sexual dysfunction and anhedonia are part of the disease process. Some
patients report improved sexual functioning as their depression improves
because of antidepressant medication. The phenomenon makes evaluating
sexual side effects difficult; also, the side effects may disappear with time,
perhaps because a biogenic amine homeostatic mechanism comes into play.




<<<PAGE 1930>>>

Other Indications. About 10 percent of patients with schizophrenia exhibit
outwardly aggressive or violent behavior, and the SDAs are effective for the
treatment of such aggression. Other off-label indications include acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) dementia, autism spectrum disorders,
Tourette disorder, Huntington disease, and Lesch–Nyhan syndrome.
Risperidone and olanzapine have been used to control aggression and selfinjury in children. These drugs are sometimes coadministered with stimulants
to children with ADHD who are comorbid for either oppositional–
defiant disorder or conduct disorder. SDAs—especially olanzapine,
quetiapine, and clozapine—are useful in persons who have severe tardive
dyskinesia. The SDAs are also effective for treating psychotic depression and
for psychosis secondary to head trauma, dementia, or treatment drugs.
Treatment with SDAs decreases the risk of suicide and water intoxication
in patients with schizophrenia. Patients with treatment-resistant OCD have
responded to the SDAs; however, a few persons treated with the SDAs have
been noted to develop treatment-emergent symptoms of OCD. Some patients
with borderline personality disorder may improve with the SDAs.
Some data suggest that treatment with conventional DRAs has protective
effects against the progression of schizophrenia when used during the first
episode of psychosis. Ongoing studies are looking at whether the use of
SDAs in at-risk patients with early evidence of disease prevents deterioration,
thus improving long-term outcomes.
Adverse Effects
The SDAs share a similar spectrum of adverse reactions but differ
considerably in terms of frequency or severity of their occurrence. Specific
side effects that are more common with an individual SDA are emphasized in
the discussion of each drug in subsequent text.
Risperidone (Risperdal)
Indications. Risperidone is indicated for the acute and maintenance
treatment of schizophrenia in adults and the treatment of schizophrenia in
adolescents ages 13 to 17 years. Risperidone is also indicated for the shortterm treatment of acute manic or mixed episodes associated with bipolar I
disorder in adults and children and adolescents ages 10 to 17 years. The




<<<PAGE 1931>>>

combination of risperidone with lithium or valproate is indicated for the
short-term treatment of acute manic or mixed episodes associated with
bipolar I disorder.
Risperidone is also indicated for the treatment of irritability associated with
an autistic spectrum disorder in children and adolescents ages 5 to 16 years,
including symptoms of aggression toward others, deliberate selfinjuriousness, temper tantrums, and quickly changing moods.
Pharmacology. Risperidone is a benzisoxazole. It undergoes extensive
first-pass hepatic metabolism to 9-hydroxy risperidone, a metabolite with
equivalent antipsychotic activity. Peak plasma levels of the parent compound
occur within 1 hour for the parent compound and 3 hours for the metabolite.
Risperidone has bioactivity of 70 percent. The combined half-life of
risperidone and 9-hydroxy risperidone averages 20 hours, so it is useful in
once-daily dosing. Risperidone is an antagonist of the serotonin 5-HT2A,
dopamine D2, α1-adrenergic and α2-adrenergic, and histamine H1 receptors. It
has a low affinity for α-adrenergic and muscarinic cholinergic receptors.
Risperidone is a potent antagonist of D2 receptors, as potent as haloperidol,
however unlike haloperidol it causes less EPS.
Dosages. The recommended dose range and frequency of risperidone
dosing have changed since the drug first came into clinical use. Risperidone
is available in 0.25-, 0.5-, 1-, 2-, 3-, and 4-mg tablets and a 1-mg/mL oral
solution. The initial dosage is usually 1 to 2 mg at night, which can then be
increased to 4 mg/day. Positron emission tomography (PET) studies have
shown that dosages of 1 to 4 mg/day provide the required D2 blockade for a
therapeutic effect. At first, it was believed that because of its short
elimination half-life, risperidone should be given twice a day, but studies
have shown equal efficacy with once-a-day dosing. Dosages above 6 mg a
day are associated with a higher incidence of adverse effects, particularly
EPS. There is no correlation between plasma concentrations and therapeutic
effects. Dosing guidelines for adolescents and children are different from
those for adults, requiring lower starting dosages; higher dosages are
associated with more adverse effects.




<<<PAGE 1932>>>

Side Effects. The EPS of risperidone is largely dosage dependent, and there
has been a trend to using lower doses than initially recommended. Weight
gain, anxiety, nausea and vomiting, rhinitis, erectile dysfunction, orgasmic
dysfunction, and increased pigmentation are associated with risperidone use.
The most common drug-related reasons for discontinuation of risperidone use
are EPS, dizziness, hyperkinesias, somnolence, and nausea. Marked elevation
of prolactin may occur. Weight gain occurs more commonly with risperidone
use in children than in adults.
Risperidone is also available as an orally disintegrating tablet (Risperdal
M-Tab), which is available in 0.5, 1, and 2 mg strengths, and in a depot
formulation (Risperdal Consta), which is given as an intramuscular (IM)
injection formulation every 2 weeks. The dose may be 25, 50, or 75 mg. Oral
risperidone should be coadministered with Risperdal Consta for the first 3
weeks before being discontinued.
Drug Interactions. Inhibition of CYP2D6 by drugs such as paroxetine and
fluoxetine can block the formation of risperidone’s active metabolite.
Risperidone is a weak inhibitor of CYP2D6 and has little effect on other
drugs. Combined use of risperidone and SSRIs may result in significant
elevation of prolactin, with associated galactorrhea and breast enlargement.
Paliperidone (Invega)
Indications. Paliperidone is indicated for the acute and maintenance
treatment of schizophrenia. Paliperidone is also indicated for the acute
treatment of schizoaffective disorder as monotherapy or as an adjunct to
mood stabilizers or antidepressants.
Pharmacology. Paliperidone is a benzisoxazole derivative and is the
primary active metabolite of risperidone. Peak plasma concentrations (Cmax)
are achieved approximately 24 hours after dosing, and steady-state
concentrations of paliperidone are attained within 4 or 5 days. The hepatic
isoenzymes CYP2D6 and CYP3A4 play a limited role in the metabolism and
elimination of paliperidone, so no dose adjustment is required in patients with
mild or moderate hepatic impairment.




<<<PAGE 1949>>>

of blood glucose, lipids, and body weight is recommended.
Although the transition from a DRA to an SDA may be made abruptly, it is
wiser to taper off the DRA slowly while titrating up the SDA. Clozapine and
olanzapine both have anticholinergic effects, and the transition from one to
the other can usually be accomplished with little risk of cholinergic rebound.
The transition from risperidone to olanzapine is best accomplished by
tapering the risperidone off over 3 weeks while simultaneously beginning
olanzapine at 10 mg a day. Risperidone, quetiapine, and ziprasidone lack
anticholinergic effects, and the abrupt transition from a DRA, olanzapine, or
clozapine to one of these agents may cause cholinergic rebound, which
consists of excessive salivation, nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea. The risk of
cholinergic rebound can be mitigated by initially augmenting risperidone,
quetiapine, or ziprasidone with an anticholinergic drug, which is then tapered
off slowly. Any initiation and termination of SDA use should be
accomplished gradually.
It is wise to overlap the administration of the new drug with the old drug.
Of interest, some people have a more robust clinical response while taking
the two agents during the transition and then regressing on monotherapy with
the newer drug. We know little about the safety of combination antipsychotic
treatment.
Persons receiving regular injections of depot formulations of a DRA who
are to switch to SDA use are given the first dose of the SDA on the day the
next injection is due.
Persons who developed agranulocytosis while taking clozapine can safely
switch to olanzapine use, although initiation of olanzapine use amid
clozapine-induced agranulocytosis can prolong the time of recovery from the
usual 3 to 4 days up to 11 to 12 days. It is prudent to wait for the resolution of
agranulocytosis before initiating olanzapine use. Emergence or recurrence of
agranulocytosis has not been reported with olanzapine, even in persons who
developed it while taking clozapine.
SDA use by pregnant women has not been studied, but consideration
should be given to the potential of risperidone to raise prolactin
concentrations, sometimes up to three to four times the upper limit of the
normal range. Because the drugs can be excreted in breast milk, they should
not be taken by nursing mothers. The dosages for selected SDAs are given in
Table 21-9.




<<<PAGE 1961>>>

paralytic ileus, although the relief is only transitory. Bethanechol
(Urecholine) (20 to 40 mg a day) may be useful in some persons with urinary
retention.
Weight gain is associated with increased mortality and morbidity and with
medication noncompliance. Low-potency DRAs may cause significant
weight gain but not as much as is seen with the SDAs olanzapine (Zyprexa)
and clozapine (Clozaril). Molindone and perhaps loxapine (Loxitane) appear
to be least likely to cause weight gain.
Endocrine Effects. Blockade of the dopamine receptors in the
tuberoinfundibular tract results in the increased secretion of prolactin, which
can result in breast enlargement, galactorrhea, amenorrhea, and inhibited
orgasm in women and impotence in men. The SDAs, except risperidone
(Risperdal), are not significantly associated with an increase in prolactin
levels and may be the drugs of choice for persons experiencing disturbing
side effects from increased prolactin release.
Sexual Adverse Effects. Both men and women taking DRAs can
experience anorgasmia and decreased libido. Up to 50 percent of men who
take antipsychotics report ejaculatory and erectile disturbances. Sildenafil
(Viagra), vardenafil (Levitra), and tadalafil (Cialis) are often used to treat
psychotropic-induced orgasmic dysfunction, but they have not been studied
in combination with the DRAs. Thioridazine is mainly associated with
decreased libido and retrograde ejaculation in men. Priapism and reports of
painful orgasms have also been described, both possibly resulting from α1adrenergic antagonist activity.
Skin and Eye Effects. Allergic dermatitis and photosensitivity may occur,
especially with low-potency agents. Urticarial, maculopapular, petechial, and
edematous eruptions may occur early in treatment, generally in the first few
weeks, and remit spontaneously. A photosensitivity reaction that resembles a
severe sunburn also occurs in some persons taking chlorpromazine. Persons
should be warned of this adverse effect, should spend no more than 30 to 60
minutes in the sun, and should use sunscreens. Long-term chlorpromazine
use is associated with blue-gray discoloration of skin areas exposed to
sunlight. The skin changes often begin with a tan or golden brown color and




<<<PAGE 1982>>>

OCD as a genetically determined, lifelong condition that is best treated
continuously with drugs and cognitive-behavioral therapy from the onset of
symptoms in childhood throughout the lifespan.
SSRI dosages for OCD may need to be higher than those required to treat
depression. Although some responses can be seen in the first few weeks of
treatment, it may take several months for the maximum effects to become
evident. Patients who fail to obtain adequate relief of their OCD symptoms
with an SSRI will usually benefit from the addition of a small dose of
risperidone (Risperdal). Apart from the extrapyramidal side effects of
risperidone, patients should be monitored for increases in prolactin levels
when this combination is used. Clinically, hyperprolactinemia may manifest
as gynecomastia and galactorrhea (in both men and women) and loss of
menses.
Several disorders are now considered to be within the OCD spectrum. This
spectrum includes several conditions and symptoms characterized by
nonsuicidal self-mutilation, such as trichotillomania, eyebrow picking, nose
picking, nail-biting, compulsive picking of skin blemishes, and cutting.
Patients with these behaviors benefit from treatment with SSRIs. Other
spectrum disorders include compulsive gambling, compulsive shopping,
hypochondriasis, and body dysmorphic disorder.
PANIC DISORDER. Paroxetine, fluoxetine, and sertraline are indicated for the

treatment of panic disorder, with or without agoraphobia. These agents work
less rapidly than do benzodiazepines but are far superior to them for the
treatment of panic disorder with comorbid depression. Citalopram and
fluvoxamine also may reduce spontaneous or induced panic attacks. Because
fluoxetine can initially heighten anxiety symptoms, persons with panic
disorder must begin taking small dosages (5 mg a day) and increase the
dosage slowly. Low doses of benzodiazepines may be given to manage this
side effect.
SOCIAL ANXIETY DISORDER. SSRIs are effective agents in the treatment of

social phobia. They reduce both symptoms and disability. The response rate
is comparable to that seen with the MAOI phenelzine (Nardil), the previous
standard treatment. The SSRIs are safer to use than MAOIs or
benzodiazepines.




<<<PAGE 2190>>>

Therapeutic Indications
There is considerably more experience in clinical psychiatry with clonidine
than with guanfacine. There is recent interest in the use of guanfacine for the
same indications that respond to clonidine due to guanfacine’s longer halflife and relative lack of sedative effects.
Withdrawal from Opioids, Alcohol, Benzodiazepines, or Nicotine.
Clonidine and guanfacine are effective in reducing the autonomic symptoms
of rapid opioid withdrawal (e.g., hypertension, tachycardia, dilated pupils,
sweating, lacrimation, and rhinorrhea) but not the associated subjective
sensations. Clonidine administration (0.1 to 0.2 mg two to four times a day)
is initiated before detoxification and is then tapered off over 1 to 2 weeks
(Table 21-55).
Clonidine and guanfacine can reduce symptoms of alcohol and
benzodiazepine withdrawal, including anxiety, diarrhea, and tachycardia.
They can reduce craving, anxiety, and irritability symptoms of nicotine
withdrawal. The transdermal patch formulation of clonidine is associated
with better long-term compliance for purposes of detoxification than is the
tablet formulation.
Tourette Disorder. Clonidine and guanfacine are effective drugs for the
treatment of Tourette disorder. Most clinicians begin treatment for Tourette
disorder with the standard DRAs haloperidol (Haldol) and pimozide (Orap)
and the SDAs risperidone (Risperdal) and olanzapine (Zyprexa). However, if
concerned about the adverse effects of these drugs, the clinician may begin
treatment with clonidine or guanfacine. The starting dose of clonidine for
children is 0.05 mg a day; it can be increased to 0.3 mg a day in divided
doses. Clonidine may take long periods (e.g., 4 to 6 months) to positively
effect the symptoms of the disorder. The response rate has been reported to
be up to 70 percent.
Table 21-54
α2-Adrenergic Receptor Agonists Used in Psychiatrya




<<<PAGE 3137>>>

Benzodiazepines Increased beta activity
Clozapine
(Clozaril)

Nonspecific change

Olanzapine
(Zyprexa)

Nonspecific change

Risperidone
(Risperdal)

Nonspecific change

Quetiapine
(Seroquel)

No significant changes

Aripiprazole
(Abilify)

No significant changes

Lithium

Slowing or paroxysmal activity

Alcohol

Decreased alpha activity; increased theta activity

Opioids

Decreased alpha activity; increased voltage of
theta and delta waves; in overdose, slow waves

Barbiturates

Increased beta activity; in withdrawal states,
generalized paroxysmal activity and spike
discharges

Marijuana

Increased alpha activity in frontal area of brain;
overall slow alpha activity

Cocaine

Similar to marijuana

Inhalants

Diffuse slowing of delta and theta waves

Nicotine

Increased alpha activity; in withdrawal, marked
decrease in alpha activity

Caffeine

In withdrawal, increase in amplitude or voltage of
theta activity

Topographic Quantitative Electroencephalography (QEEG)




<<<PAGE 3732>>>

Riluzole, 607
Rimonabant, 976
Risperdal. See Risperidone
Risperidone, 598, 608, 627
for bipolar disorder, 375t
in dissociative identity disorder, 448
dosages, 609–610
drug interactions, 610
for early-onset bipolar disorder, 183
for early-onset schizophrenia, 209–210
indications, 609
for irritability in autism spectrum disorder, 128
pharmacology, 609
for PTSD, 173
for schizophrenia, 353t
side effects, 610
for tics, 160
Rivastigmine, 697
RLS. See Restless legs syndrome (RLS)
Robidone. See Hydrocodone
Rogers, Carl, 1087–1088
Roger v. Oken, 840
Rohypnol, 303, 304
Role-playing, 771
Ropinirole, 598, 705
for restless legs syndrome, 515
Rorschach, Herman, 58
Rorschach test, 58–59, 59f, 59t
Inkblots, 83t, 84
Rotigotine, for restless legs syndrome, 515
Rotter Incomplete Sentences Blank, 83t
Rouse v. Cameron, 840
Rozerem. See Ramelteon
rTMS. See Repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS)
Rubella, 104
Rubinstein–Taybi syndrome, 86t
Rumination disorder, 164–166


