<<<PAGE 440>>>

is also an antihypertensive agent, it causes a decrease in blood pressure and
heart rate. We should monitor vital signs in patients, especially during
initiation and titration of the dose. Common side effects include somnolence,
headache, upper abdominal pain, and fatigue. When tapering the drug, the
rate should be no more than 0.1 mg every 3 to 7 days.
Extended-release guanfacine is a once-a-day medication for children
between 6 and 17 years of age, available in 1-mg, 2-mg, 3-mg, and 4-mg
tabs. It is swallowed whole with liquids, and the patient should not take it
with a high-fat meal. It is initiated as a 1-mg tab daily and titrated by 1
mg/day at 1-week intervals. The maximum dose approved is 4 mg/day. As a
monotherapy, improvement in ADHD symptoms occurs at 0.05 to 0.08
mg/kg once daily. As an adjunctive treatment, optimal doses are reported to
range from 0.05 to 0.12 mg/kg/day. Common side effects include
somnolence, sedation, fatigue, nausea, hypotension, insomnia, and dizziness.
We should monitor the heart rate and blood pressure. When discontinuing the
drug, one should use a gradual taper, decreasing by 1 mg every 3 to 7 days.
α-Adrenergic agents, including the short- and extended-release
preparations of guanfacine and clonidine, are sometimes preferred treatments
in children with ADHD and comorbid tic disorders when stimulants
exacerbated the tics. Bupropion is somewhat useful for some children and
adolescents in the treatment of ADHD. One multisite, double-blind, placebocontrolled study found a positive result regarding the efficacy of bupropion.
No further studies have compared bupropion with other stimulants. There is a
higher risk of seizures at doses of 400 mg/day or more.
Few data confirm the efficacy of SSRIs in the treatment of ADHD, but due
to the frequency of comorbid depression and anxiety with ADHD, in cases of
comorbidity, the SSRIs are likely to be considered at least in conjunction
with a stimulant.
We should not use tricyclic drugs for ADHD due to potential cardiac
arrhythmia effects. The reports of sudden death in at least four children with
ADHD using desipramine have made the tricyclic antidepressants an unlikely
choice. Antipsychotics may treat refractory severely hyperactive children and
adolescents who are significantly dysfunctional. Antipsychotics are generally
not chosen in the treatment of ADHD due to the risks of tardive dyskinesia,
withdrawal dyskinesia, neuroleptic malignant syndrome, and weight gain.
Modafinil, another type of CNS stimulant, a narcolepsy treatment, may




<<<PAGE 441>>>

help treat adults with ADHD. Only one randomized, double-blind, placebocontrolled study of the efficacy and safety of modafinil film-coated tablets in
approximately 250 adolescents with ADHD showed that 48 percent of those
on active treatment were rated as “much” or “very much” improved
compared with 17 percent of patients receiving placebo. The dosage range
was from 170 to 425 mg administered once daily, titrated to optimal doses
based on efficacy and tolerability. Modafinil failed to receive FDA approval
based on a Stevens–Johnson skin rash that occurred in a patient during the
trial. The most common side effects included insomnia, headache, and
decreased appetite.
Some clinicians use venlafaxine, especially for children and adolescents,
with combinations of ADHD and depression or anxiety features. No clear
empirical evidence supports the use of venlafaxine in the treatment of
ADHD.
One open-label report of reboxetine, a selective norepinephrine reuptake
inhibitor that is not available in the US, in 31 children and adolescents with
ADHD who were resistant to methylphenidate treatment, suggested that this
agent may have efficacy. In this open trial, reboxetine was initiated and
maintained at 4 mg/day. The most common side effects included drowsiness,
sedation, and gastrointestinal symptoms. Reboxetine and other new agents in
this class await controlled studies.
Monitoring Pharmacologic Treatment
STIMULANTS. Stimulant medications have adrenergic effects and cause
moderate increases in blood pressure and pulse rate. At baseline, the most
recent American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry (AACAP)
practice parameters recommend the following workup before starting the use
of stimulant medications: physical examination, blood pressure, pulse,
weight, and height. Screening electrocardiograms are recommended prior to
initiating stimulant medications, particularly if there is a family history or risk
factors for cardiac disease.
Children and adolescents using stimulants should have their height, weight,
blood pressure, and pulse checked quarterly and have a physical examination
annually. Monitoring starts with the initiation of medication. Because school
performance is most markedly affected, we should give individual attention




<<<PAGE 975>>>

Amphetamine-type drugs with abuse potential also include
phendimetrazine (which is Schedule II of the Controlled Substance Act
[CSA]), and diethylpropion, benzphetamine, and phentermine (which are
Schedules III or IV of the CSA). All of these drugs, most likely, are capable
of causing all of the listed amphetamine-induced disorders. Modafinil, used
in the treatment of narcolepsy, also has stimulant and euphorigenic effects in
humans, but its toxicity and likelihood of producing amphetamine-induced
disorders are unknown.
Methamphetamine is a potent form of amphetamine that abusers of the
substance inhale, smoke, or inject intravenously. Its psychological effects last
for hours and are particularly powerful. Unlike cocaine (see discussion later
in this section), which is imported, methamphetamine is a synthetic drug that
can be manufactured domestically in illicit laboratories.
Other agents called substituted, or designer amphetamines are discussed
separately later in this section.
Cocaine. People have used cocaine in its raw form for more than 15
centuries. In the United States, cycles of widespread stimulant misuse and
associated problems have occurred for more than 100 years. Cocaine and
cocaine use disorders became a major public health issue in the 1980s when
an epidemic of use spread throughout the country. Due to education and
intervention, cocaine use has since declined. However, high rates of legal,
psychiatric, medical, and social problems related to cocaine use still exist;
thus, cocaine-related disorders remain a significant public health issue.
Cocaine is an alkaloid derived from the shrub Erythroxylum coca, which is
indigenous to South America, where the leaves of the shrub are chewed by
local inhabitants to obtain the stimulating effects. The cocaine alkaloid was
first isolated in 1855 and first used as a local anesthetic in 1880. It continues
to be used, especially for eye, nose, and throat surgery, for which its
vasoconstrictive and analgesic effects are helpful. In 1884, Sigmund Freud
made a study of cocaine’s general pharmacologic effects, and, for some time,
according to his biographers, he was addicted to the drug. In the 1880s and
1890s, cocaine was widely touted as a cure for many ills, and the 1899 Merck
Manual listed it. It was the active ingredient in the beverage Coca-Cola until
1903. In 1914, as its addictive effects became known, cocaine was classified
as a narcotic, alongside morphine and heroin.




<<<PAGE 988>>>

of the patient’s family and peers, is used as a therapeutic network joining the
patient and therapist at intervals in therapy sessions. The approach promotes
group cohesiveness as a vehicle for engaging patients in this treatment. This
network is managed by the therapist to provide cohesiveness and support and
to promote compliance with treatment. Although network therapy has not
received systematic, controlled evaluation, it is frequently applied in the
psychiatric practice because it is one of the few manualized approaches
designed for use by individual practitioners in an office setting.
Pharmacologic Adjuncts
Presently, no pharmacologic treatments produce decreases in stimulant use.
However, investigators have explored several agents, and those are
summarized below.
Amphetamines. Multiple medications have been investigated as potential
treatment options for amphetamine-type stimulant disorders, though the
results have been mostly disappointing. Most serotonergic medications
studied have not demonstrated efficacy, though mirtazapine has shown some
effectiveness in a small sample of men who have sex with men. The opioidreceptor antagonist naltrexone and the dopamine antidepressant bupropion
have both shown promise in those with less severe amphetamine use
disorders, but little effect on more dependent individuals. Other medications,
including topiramate, aripiprazole, baclofen, gabapentin, and modafinil, have
demonstrated little effectiveness in this population.
Cocaine. A variety of pharmacologic agents, most approved for other uses,
have been, and are being tested clinically for the treatment of cocaine use
disorder and relapse.
Cocaine users presumed to have preexisting ADHD or mood disorders
have been treated with methylphenidate and lithium, respectively. Those
drugs are of little or no benefit in patients without the disorders, and
clinicians should adhere strictly to diagnostic criteria before using either of
them in the treatment of cocaine use disorder. In patients with ADHD, slowrelease forms of methylphenidate may be less likely to trigger cocaine
craving, but the impact of such pharmacotherapy on cocaine use is not clear.
Investigators have explored many pharmacologic agents on the premise




<<<PAGE 1081>>>

Replacement for Cannabis Dependence (ARCD) study group. Nabiximols
for the treatment of cannabis dependence: a randomized clinical trial.
JAMA Intern Med. 2019;179(9):1242–1253.
Liu S, Lane SD, Schmitz JM, Waters AJ, Cunningham KA, Moeller FG.
Relationship between attentional bias to cocaine-related stimuli and
impulsivity in cocaine-dependent subjects. Am J Drug Alcohol Abuse.
2011;37(2):117.
López-Muñoz F, Álamo C, García-García P. The discovery of
chlordiazepoxide and the clinical introduction of benzodiazepines: Half a
century of anxiolytic drugs. J Anxiety Disord. 2011;25(4):554.
Ludden AB, Wolfson AR. Understanding adolescent caffeine use:
Connecting use patterns with expectancies, reasons, and sleep. Health
Educ Behav. 2010;37:330.
Luo SX, Bisaga A. Opioid use and related disorders: From neuroscience to
treatment. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s
Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Wolters
Kluwer; 2017:1352–1373.
Luoma JB, Kohlenberg BS, Hayes SC, Fletcher L. Slow and steady wins the
race: A randomized clinical trial of acceptance and commitment therapy
targeting shame in substance use disorders. J Consult Clin Psychol.
2012;80:43.
MacKillop J, Miranda R Jr, Monti PM, Ray LA, Murphy JG, Rohsenow DJ,
McGeary JE, Swift RM, Tidey JW, Gwaltney CJ. Alcohol demand,
delayed reward discounting, and craving in relation to drinking and alcohol
use disorders. J Abnorm Psychol. 2010;11:106.
MacLean KA, Johnson MW, Griffiths RR. Mystical experiences occasioned
by the hallucinogen Psilocybin lead to increases in the personality domain
of openness. J Psychopharmacol. 2011;25:1453.
Magdum SS. An overview of Khat. Addict Disord Treat. 2011;10(2):72.
Mahler SV, Hensley-Simon M, Tahsili-Fahadan P, LaLumiere RT, Thomas
C, Fallon RV, Kalivas PW, Aston-Jones G. Modafinil attenuates
reinstatement of cocaine seeking: role for cystine-glutamate exchange and
metabotropic glutamate receptors. Addict Biol. 2014;19(1):49–60.
Mahoney CR, Brunyé TT, Giles GE. Caffeine effects on aggression and risky
decision making. In: Kanarek RB, Lieberman HR, eds. Diet, Brain,
Behavior: Practical Implications. Boca Raton: Taylor & Frances Group,




<<<PAGE 1203>>>

been promising. Dopamine agonists, including modafinil and armodafinil,
have some preliminary evidence. Omega-3-fatty acid adjunctive therapy has
conflicting evidence. N-acetylcysteine (a glutathione precursor) has some
preliminary evidence. Ketamine and other glutamatergic modulators may
have a role in treatment-resistant patients.
Table 6-7
Atypical Antipsychotics for Bipolar Disorder: Efficacy
Summary and Dose Ranges

DURATION AND PROPHYLAXIS

Maintenance Treatment. Preventing recurrences of mood episodes is the
greatest challenge facing clinicians. Not only must the chosen regimen
achieve its primary goal—sustained euthymia—but the medications should
not produce unwanted side effects that affect functioning. Sedation, cognitive
impairment, tremor, weight gain, and rash are some side effects that lead to




<<<PAGE 1632>>>

Sharafkhaneh, M.D., Ph.D.)
Paradoxical Intention. This is a cognitive technique with conflicting
evidence regarding its efficacy. In clinical practice, compliance is often a
barrier, but it does work for a limited number of patients. The theory is that
performance anxiety interferes with sleep onset. Thus, when the patient tries
to stay awake for as long as possible rather than trying to fall asleep,
performance anxiety will be reduced, and sleep latency will improve.
Hypersomnolence Disorder
We usually treat hypersomnolence disorder with medication. Although there
are no medications approved for its treatment, physicians commonly use
stimulants, with varying degrees of success. The wake-promoting substance
modafinil or traditional psychostimulants (amphetamines and their
derivatives) sometimes help manage the sleepiness. In addition to drug
therapies, the overall therapeutic approach usually includes lifestyle
adjustment, psychological counseling, drug holidays to reduce tolerance (if
using stimulants), and careful monitoring of refills, general health, and
cardiac status.
Narcolepsy
Currently, we cannot cure narcolepsy; however, the symptoms can be
managed with either the wake-promoting substances modafinil or
armodafinil, or traditional psychostimulants like amphetamines and their
derivatives. The FDA has approved two medications for the treatment of
narcolepsy as wake-promoting agents: pitolisant, which is a selective H3
receptor antagonist/inverse agonist, and solriamfetol, a selective
norepinephrine–dopamine reuptake inhibitor. For managing cataplexy,
clinicians often administer REM sleep–suppressing drugs (e.g., many
antidepressants). This approach capitalizes on the REM sleep-suppressant
properties of these drugs. Because cataplexy is presumably an intrusion of
REM sleep phenomena into the awake state, the rationale is clear. Many
reports indicate that imipramine and protriptyline are quite effective in
reducing or eliminating cataplexy. Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors




<<<PAGE 1634>>>

Obstructive Sleep Apnea-Hypopnea. A number of treatments are
available for OSA, including PAP, oral appliances, positional therapy,
surgical intervention, and weight loss. Medications have not been useful for
treating OSA. Wakefulness promoting agents, such as modafinil,
solriamfetol, and pitolisant, may help with the residual sleepiness that may
persist despite the use of other OSA treatments such as PAP. However, these
medications do not address the pathophysiology of airway occlusion.
POSITIVE AIRWAY PRESSURE. PAP is the preferred treatment for OSA (Fig. 15-

8). The PAP apparatus consists of a fan-driven blower, a nasal mask or
oronasal interface, and tubing connecting the two. The airflow through the
interface (usually a mask or nasal pillows) provides a positive pressure that
offsets oropharyngeal collapse produced by inspiratory negative thoracic
pressure. In this manner, it acts as a pneumatic splint, thereby maintaining the
airway. When appropriately titrating the pressure, even the most severe sleep
apnea can be alleviated. Results are often dramatic. PAP devices come in
several varieties. The most common are systems that provide a preset
continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP). For individuals who find it
difficult to exhale against a continuous pressure, bilevel positive airway
pressure (BPAP) may provide a solution. BPAP devices have different
inspiratory and expiratory pressure settings. More recently, systems that
sense the patient’s changes in airway resistance and automatically adjust the
positive airway pressure have been gaining popularity. Such automatic
positive airway pressure (APAP) systems should theoretically be able to
adapt to changes in pressure requirements produced by sleep deprivation,
medications, weight change, sleep stage, illness, and aging. Finally, there are
timed bilevel and servo-ventilation systems, but these fall into the category of
noninvasive positive pressure ventilation (NIPPV) systems, which are more
appropriate for treating other pulmonary diseases and breathing problems in
neuromuscular diseases. The tremendous efficacy and remarkable safety of
PAP therapies have made them the standard of care for patients who can
tolerate sleeping with the machine. The principal therapeutic challenge is
utilization. Patient education and systematic follow-up are crucial. When
problems with the interface, the pressure, nasal stuffiness, and other barriers
to routine, nightly use arise, we should remedy these quickly to ensure
therapeutic adherence. When used properly, the success of PAP therapy has




<<<PAGE 1637>>>

melatonin levels begin to rise at dusk and remain elevated until dawn. Bright
light suppresses the release of melatonin. Melatonin, in a sense, is the signal
of darkness in the brain. As such, we can use it clinically to manage sighted
patients with disturbed sleep–wake cycles. Melatonin is available over the
counter in the United States. A prescription synthetic melatonin agonist
(ramelteon) is also available. Ramelteon is FDA approved for treating
patients with sleep-onset insomnia but is used off label for the entire
spectrum of circadian rhythm sleep disorders. Outside the United States, a
sustained-release prescription form of melatonin is available. Of interest, the
only medication approved for shift work sleep disorder is the wakepromoting compound modafinil. Modafinil treats sleepiness occurring during
night shift work.
Chronotherapy. Chronotherapy is one technique used to reset the biologic
clock. It involves progressively phase delaying a person until synchronizing
the circadian oscillator with the desired sleep–wake schedule. Most young
and middle-aged adults have a propensity to phase delay the circadian sleep–
wake rhythm progressively anyhow. Thus, phase delaying each night by 2 to
3 hours is simpler than phase advancing because it capitalizes on a natural
tendency. Halting the phase delay at the appropriate moment and maintaining
the desired synchrony can be a challenge. The patient also has to cope with
an odd sleep–wake schedule for the better part of a week during therapy
(which can interfere with school or work). For these reasons, the
development of light therapy and pharmacologic interventions has
overshadowed chronotherapy.
Parasomnias and Sleep-Related Movement Disorders
Nightmare Disorder. Treatment using behavioral techniques can be
helpful. Desensitization and exposure therapy, image rehearsal therapy, lucid
dream therapy, and cognitive therapy can help address nightmare disorder.
Additionally, evidence for the use of prazosin, a CNS α-1 receptor antagonist,
in the treatment of PTSD-related nightmares is growing. Nitrazepam and
triazolam may also be helpful.
Recurrent Isolated Sleep Paralysis. Improved sleep hygiene and




<<<PAGE 1898>>>

Side Effects Associated with Newer Medications
All medications are associated with side effects. The clinician should be
aware of these, be able to recognize them, and take appropriate measures to
treat them.
Somnolence. Sedation is often an intended effect of many psychotropic
drugs, mainly when used to treat insomnia, anxiety, or agitation. Daytime
sleepiness, or somnolence, is also an unwanted adverse event, however. It is
essential for the clinician to alert patients to the possibility of sedation and to
document that the person was advised to exercise caution when operating any
type of vehicle or mechanical equipment. Some somnolence results from a
carryover of nighttime use of drugs as hypnotics. Even with drugs such as the
SSRIs, which are activating for many patients, somnolence can be
problematic. In some instances, it results from impairment of sleep quality.
Chronic use of SSRIs can cause some patients to experience a subjective
sense of fatigue, exhaustion, or yawning, even with adequate amounts of
sleep. Management of unwanted somnolence includes adjustment of dose or
timing of administration, switching to alternative medications, the addition of
small doses of stimulants, or the addition of modafinil (Provigil).
Gastrointestinal Disturbances. The significant gastrointestinal (GI) side
effects of the older antidepressant and antipsychotic drugs consisted primarily
of constipation and dry mouth, a consequence of their antimuscarinic activity.
Most of the newer drugs have little antimuscarinic activity but do have effects
on the serotonin system. Most of the body’s serotonin is in the GI tract, and
serotonergic drugs often cause varying degrees of stomach pain, nausea,
flatulence, and diarrhea. In most cases, these side effects are transient, but
some persons never accommodate and must switch to another class of drugs.
The initial use of lower doses or the use of delayed-release preparations are
the most effective strategies for minimizing GI side effects.
Movement Disorders. The introduction of SDAs has dramatically reduced
the incidence of medication-induced movement disorders, but varying
degrees of dose-related parkinsonism, akathisia, and dystonia still occur.
Risperidone (Risperdal) most closely resembles the older agents in terms of
these side effects. Olanzapine (Zyprexa) also causes more extrapyramidal




<<<PAGE 2153>>>

amphetamine molecule. In most cases, this makes the drug better tolerated,
but some patients experience a more significant benefit from the mixed
isomer preparation.
Methylphenidate, dextroamphetamine, and amphetamine are indirectly
acting sympathomimetics, with the primary effect causing the release of
catecholamines from presynaptic neurons. Their clinical effectiveness is
associated with increased release of both dopamine and norepinephrine.
Dextroamphetamine and methylphenidate are also weak inhibitors of
catecholamine reuptake and inhibitors of monoamine oxidase.
In recent years, there has been an explosion of new brand name stimulants.
Most of these are variations of the generic methylphenidate or mixed
amphetamine salts that provide additional options to customize treatment in
terms of dosing and duration of effect.
For modafinil, the specific mechanism of action is unknown. Narcolepsy–
cataplexy results from a deficiency of hypocretin, a hypothalamic
neuropeptide. Hypocretin-producing neurons are activated after modafinil
administration. Modafinil does not appear to work through a dopaminergic
mechanism. It does have α1-adrenergic agonist properties, which may
account for its alerting effects, because the wakefulness induced by modafinil
can be attenuated by prazosin, an α1-adrenergic antagonist. Some evidence
suggests that modafinil has some norepinephrine reuptake blocking effects.
Armodafinil (Nuvigil) is the R-enantiomer of modafinil. Both drugs have
similar clinical effects and side effects.
Therapeutic Indications
Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD). Sympathomimetics
are the first-line drugs for the treatment of ADHD in children and are
effective about 75 percent of the time. Methylphenidate and
dextroamphetamine are equally effective and work within 15 to 30 minutes.
Sympathomimetic drugs decrease hyperactivity, increase attentiveness, and
reduce impulsivity. They may also reduce comorbid oppositional behaviors
associated with ADHD. Many persons take these drugs throughout their
schooling and beyond. In responsive persons, the use of a sympathomimetic
may be a critical determinant of scholastic success.
Sympathomimetics improve the core ADHD symptoms of hyperactivity,




<<<PAGE 2154>>>

impulsivity, and inattentiveness and permit improved social interactions with
teachers, family, other adults, and peers. The success of long-term treatment
of ADHD with sympathomimetics, which are efficacious for most of the
various constellations of ADHD symptoms present from childhood to
adulthood, supports a model in which ADHD results from a genetically
determined neurochemical imbalance that requires lifelong pharmacologic
management.
Methylphenidate is the most commonly used initial agent at a dosage of 5
to 10 mg every 3 to 4 hours. Dosages may be increased to a maximum of 20
mg four times daily or 1 mg/kg a day. Use of the 20-mg sustained-release
formulation to achieve 6 hours of benefit and eliminate the need for dosing at
school is supported by many experts, although other authorities believe it is
less effective than the immediate-release formulation. Dextroamphetamine is
about twice as potent as methylphenidate on a per milligram basis and
provides 6 to 8 hours of benefit. Some 70 percent of nonresponders to one
sympathomimetic may benefit from another. All of the sympathomimetic
drugs should be tried before switching to drugs of a different class. The
previous dictum that sympathomimetics worsen tics and, therefore, should be
avoided by persons with comorbid ADHD and tic disorders has been
questioned. Small dosages of sympathomimetics do not appear to cause an
increase in the frequency and severity of tics. Alternatives to
sympathomimetics for ADHD include bupropion (Wellbutrin), venlafaxine
(Effexor), guanfacine (Tenex), clonidine (Catapres), and tricyclic drugs.
Further studies are needed to determine whether modafinil improves the
symptoms of ADHD.
Short-term use of sympathomimetics induces a euphoric feeling; however,
tolerance develops for both the euphoric feeling and the sympathomimetic
activity.
Narcolepsy and Hypersomnolence. Narcolepsy consists of sudden
sleep attacks (narcolepsy), sudden loss of postural tone (cataplexy), loss of
voluntary motor control going into (hypnagogic) or coming out of
(hypnopompic) sleep (sleep paralysis), and hypnagogic or hypnopompic
hallucinations. Sympathomimetics reduce narcoleptic sleep attacks and
improve wakefulness in other types of hypersomnolent states. Modafinil is
approved as an antisomnolence agent for the treatment of narcolepsy, for




<<<PAGE 2155>>>

people who cannot adjust to night shift work, and for those who do not sleep
well because of obstructive sleep apnea.
Other sympathomimetics are also used to maintain wakefulness and
accuracy of motor performance in persons subject to sleep deprivation, such
as pilots and military personnel. Persons with narcolepsy, unlike persons with
ADHD, may develop a tolerance for the therapeutic effects of
sympathomimetics.
In direct comparison with amphetamine-like drugs, modafinil is equally
useful at maintaining wakefulness, with a lower risk of excessive activation.
Depressive Disorders. Sympathomimetics may be used for treatmentresistant depressive disorders, usually as augmentation of standard
antidepressant drug therapy. Possible indications for the use of
sympathomimetics as monotherapy include depression in elderly persons,
who are at increased risk for adverse effects from standard antidepressant
drugs; depression in medically ill persons, especially persons with AIDS;
obtundation caused by chronic use of opioids; and clinical situations in which
a rapid response is necessary but for which ECT is contraindicated.
Depressed patients with abulia and anergia may also benefit.
Dextroamphetamine may be useful in differentiating pseudodementia of
depression from dementia. A depressed person generally responds to a 5-mg
dose with increased alertness and improved cognition. Sympathomimetics are
thought to provide only short-term benefit (2 to 4 weeks) for depression
because most persons rapidly develop a tolerance for the antidepressant
effects of the drugs. However, some clinicians report that long-term treatment
with sympathomimetics can benefit some persons.
Encephalopathy Caused by Brain Injury. Sympathomimetics increase
alertness, cognition, motivation, and motor performance in persons with
neurologic deficits caused by strokes, trauma, tumors, or chronic infections.
Treatment with sympathomimetics may permit earlier and more robust
participation in rehabilitative programs. Poststroke lethargy and apathy may
respond to long-term use of sympathomimetics.
Obesity. Sympathomimetics are used in the treatment of obesity because of
their anorexia-inducing effects. Because tolerance develops for the anorectic




<<<PAGE 2156>>>

effects and because of the drugs’ high abuse potential, their use for this
indication is limited. Of the sympathomimetic drugs, phentermine (Adipex-P,
Fastin) is the most widely used for appetite suppression. Phentermine was the
second half of “fen-phen,” an off-label combination of fenfluramine and
phentermine, widely used to promote weight loss. Fenfluramine and
dexfenfluramine were withdrawn from the market because of their adverse
effect, including cardiac valvular insufficiency, primary pulmonary
hypertension, and irreversible loss of cerebral serotoninergic nerve fibers.
The toxicity of fenfluramine is attributed to the fact that it stimulates the
release of massive amounts of serotonin from nerve endings, a mechanism of
action not shared by phentermine. The use of phentermine alone has not been
reported to cause the same adverse effects like those caused by fenfluramine
or dexfenfluramine.
Careful limitations of caloric intake and judicious exercise are at the core
of any successful weight loss program. Sympathomimetic drugs facilitate the
loss of, at most, an additional fraction of a pound per week.
Sympathomimetic drugs are effective appetite suppressants only for the first
few weeks of use; then, the anorexigenic effects tend to decrease.
Fatigue. Between 70 and 90 percent of individuals with multiple sclerosis
experience fatigue. Modafinil, armodafinil, amphetamines, methylphenidate,
and the dopamine receptor agonist amantadine (Symmetrel) are sometimes
useful in combating this symptom. Other causes of fatigue, such as chronic
fatigue syndrome, respond to stimulants in many cases.
Precautions and Adverse Reactions
The most common adverse effects associated with amphetamine-like drugs
are stomach pain, anxiety, irritability, insomnia, tachycardia, cardiac
arrhythmias, and dysphoria. Sympathomimetics cause a decreased appetite,
although tolerance usually develops for this effect. The treatment of common
adverse effects in children with ADHD is usually straightforward (Table 2149). The drugs can also cause increases in heart rate and BP and may cause
palpitations. Less common adverse effects include the possible induction of
movement disorders, such as tics, Tourette disorder–like symptoms, and
dyskinesias, all of which are often self-limited over 7 to 10 days. If a person




<<<PAGE 2159>>>

never occurs. The more considerable concern is the presence of adolescent or
adult cohabitants who might confiscate the supply of sympathomimetics for
abuse or sale.
The use of sympathomimetics should be avoided during pregnancy,
especially during the first trimester. Dextroamphetamine and
methylphenidate pass into the breast milk, and it is not known whether
modafinil or armodafinil do.
Drug Interactions
Sympathomimetics decrease the metabolism of several drugs, thus increasing
their plasma levels. These drugs include tricyclic or tetracyclic
antidepressants, warfarin (Coumadin), primidone (Mysoline), phenobarbital
(Luminal), phenytoin (Dilantin), or phenylbutazone (Butazolidin).
Sympathomimetics decrease the therapeutic efficacy of many
antihypertensive drugs, especially guanethidine (Esimil, Ismelin). The
sympathomimetics should be used with extreme caution with MAOIs.
Laboratory Interferences
Dextroamphetamine may elevate plasma corticosteroid levels and interfere
with some assay methods for urinary corticosteroids.
Dosage and Administration
Many psychiatrists believe that governmental authorities have overly
regulated amphetamine use. Amphetamines are listed as schedule II drugs by
the Drug Enforcement Agency. Some states keep a registry of patients who
receive amphetamines. Such mandates worry both patients and physicians
about breaches in confidentiality, and physicians are concerned that official
agencies may misinterpret their prescribing practices. Consequently, some
physicians may withhold prescription of sympathomimetics, even from
persons who may benefit from the medications.
The dosage ranges and the available preparations for sympathomimetics
are presented in Table 21-50. Vyvanse dosing is a particular case because
many patients are switched to this formulation after being treated with other
stimulants. A conversion table is shown in Table 21-51. It is available in 20-,
30-, 40-, 50-, 60-, and 70-mg capsules. Dosage should be individualized




<<<PAGE 2160>>>

according to the therapeutic needs and response of the patient.
Lisdexamfetamine (Vyvanse) should be administered at the lowest effective
dosage. In patients who are either starting treatment for the first time or
switching from another medication, 30 mg once daily in the morning is the
recommended dose. Dosages may go up or down in 10 or 20 mg increments
in intervals of approximately 1 week. Patients should avoid taking the drug in
the afternoon, as this may cause insomnia. The drug may be taken with or
without food.
Dextroamphetamine, methylphenidate, amphetamine, benzphetamine, and
methamphetamine are schedule II drugs and, in some states, require triplicate
prescriptions. Phendimetrazine (Adipost, Bontril) and phenmetrazine
(Prelude) are schedule III drugs, and modafinil, armodafinil, phentermine,
diethylpropion (Tenuate), and mazindol (Mazanor, Sanorex) are schedule IV
drugs.
Pretreatment evaluation should include an evaluation of the patient’s
cardiac function, with particular attention to the presence of hypertension or
tachyarrhythmias. The clinician should also examine the patient for the
presence of movement disorders, such as tics and dyskinesia, because the
administration of sympathomimetics can exacerbate these conditions. If tics
are present, many experts will not prescribe sympathomimetics but will
instead choose clonidine or antidepressants. However, recent data indicate
that sympathomimetics may cause only a mild increase in motor tics and may
suppress vocal tics. Liver function and renal function should be assessed, and
dosages of sympathomimetics should be reduced for persons with impaired
metabolism.
Table 21-50
Selected
Sympathomimetics
Psychiatry

Commonly

Used

in




<<<PAGE 2162>>>

Vyvanse

Adderall IR

Dexedrine

70 mg

30 mg

22.5 mg

50 mg

20 mg

15 mg

30 mg

10 mg

7.5 mg

XR, extended release; IR, immediate-release.

Persons with ADHD can take immediate-release methylphenidate at 8 AM,
12 noon, and 4 PM. Dextroamphetamine, Adderall, sustainedrelease methylphenidate, or 18 mg of extended-release methylphenidate may
be taken once at 8 AM. The starting dose of methylphenidate ranges from 2.5
mg of regular to 20 mg of the sustained-release formulation. If this is
inadequate, it may be increased to a maximum dose of 80 mg in children and
90 mg daily in adults. The dosage of dextroamphetamine is 2.5 to 40 mg a
day up to 0.5 mg/kg a day.
The starting dosage of modafinil is 200 mg in the morning in medically
healthy individuals and 100 mg in the morning in persons with hepatic
impairment. Some persons take a second 100- or 200-mg dose in the
afternoon. The maximum recommended daily dosage is 400 mg, although
dosages of 600 to 1,200 mg a day have been used safely. Adverse effects
become prominent at dosages greater than 400 mg a day. Compared with
amphetamine-like drugs, modafinil promotes wakefulness but produces less
attentiveness and less irritability. Some persons with excessive daytime
sleepiness extend the activity of the morning modafinil dose with an
afternoon dose of methylphenidate. Armodafinil is virtually identical to
modafinil but is dosed differently, the dosing range being 50 to 250 mg daily.

ATOMOXETINE (STRATTERA)
Atomoxetine is the first nonstimulant drug to be approved by the FDA as a
treatment of ADHD in children, adolescents, and adults. It is included in this
chapter because it shares this indication with the stimulants described earlier.
Pharmacologic Actions
Atomoxetine is believed to produce a therapeutic effect through selective




<<<PAGE 2280>>>

the efficacy and safety of ramelteon in subjects with chronic insomnia. J
Clin Sleep Med. 2007;3(5):495.
Stimulants
Adler LA, Sutton VK, Moore RJ, Dietrich AP, Reimherr FW. Quality of life
assessment in adult patients with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder
treated with atomoxetine. J Clin Psychopharmacol. 2006;26(6):648–652.
Aiken CB. Pramipexole in psychiatry: a systematic review of the literature. J
Clin Psychiatry. 2007;68(8):1230–1236.
Amiri S, Mohammadi MR, Mohammadi M, Nouroozinejad GH, Kahbazi M.
Modafinil as a treatment for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder in
children and adolescents: a double-blind, randomized clinical trial. Prog
Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry. 2008;32(1):145–149.
Bangs ME, Emsile GJ, Spencer TJ, Ramsey JL, Carlson C. Efficacy and
safety of atomoxetine in adolescents with attention-deficit/hyperactivity
disorder and major depression. J Child Adolesc Psychopharmacol.
2007;17(4):407–420.
Barone P, Scazella L, Marconi R, Antonini A, Morgante L. Pramipexole
versus sertraline in the treatment of depression in Parkinson’s disease: a
national multicenter parallel-group randomized study. J Neuro.
2006;253(5):601–607.
Cheng JY, Chen RY, Ko JS, Ng EM. Efficacy and safety of atomoxetine for
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder in children and adolescents-metaanalysis and meta-regression analysis. Psychopharmacology (Berl).
2007;194(2):197.
Eliyahu U, Berlin S, Hadad E, Heled Y, Moran DS. Psychostimulants and
military operations. Mil Med. 2007;172(4):383.
Fava M, Thase ME, DeBattista C, Doghramji K, Arora S. Modafinil
augmentation of selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor therapy in MDD
partial responders with persistent fatigue and sleepiness. Ann Clin
Psychiatry. 2007;19(3):153.
Fawcett J. Sympathomimetics and dopamine receptor agonists. In: Sadock
BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook
of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Vol. 2. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins; 2009:3241.
Fleckenstein AE, Volz TJ, Riddle EL, Gibb JW, Hanson GR. New insights




<<<PAGE 2281>>>

into the mechanism of action of amphetamines. Annu Rev Pharmacol
Toxicol. 2007;47:
681–698.
Frye MA, Grunze H, Suppes T, McElroy SL, Keck PE Jr. A placebocontrolled evaluation of adjunctive modafinil in the treatment of bipolar
depression. Am J Psychiatry. 2007;164(8):1242–1249.
Geller D, Donnelly C, Lopez F, Rubin R, Newcorn J. Atomoxetine treatment
for pediatric patients with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder with
comorbid anxiety disorder. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry.
2007;46(9):1119–1127.
Hirshkowitz M, Black J. Effect of adjunctive modafinil on wakefulness and
quality of life in patients with excessive sleepiness-associated obstructive
sleep apnoea/hypopnoea syndrome: a 12-month, open-label extensions
study. CNS Drugs. 2007;21(5):407–416.
Makris AP, Rush CR, Frederich RC, Taylor AC, Kelly TH. Behavioral and
subjective effects of d-amphetamine and modafinil in healthy adults. Exp
Clin Psychopharmacol. 2007;15(2):123–133.
McElroy SL, Guerdjikova A, Kotwal R, Weige JA, Nelson EB. Atomoxetine
in the treatment of binge-eating disorder: a randomized placebo-controlled
trial. J Clin Psychiatry. 2007;68(3):390–398.
Minzenberg MJ, Carter CS. Modafinil: a review of neurochemical actions
and effects on cognition. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2008;97(7):1477.
Pivonello R, De Martino MC, Cappabianca P, De Leo M, Faggiano A,
Lombardi G, Hofland LJ, Lamberts SWJ, Colao A. The medical treatment
of Cushing’s disease: effectiveness of chronic treatment with the dopamine
agonist cabergoline in patients unsuccessfully treated by surgery. J Clin
Endocrinology Metabolism. 2009;94(1):223–230.
Pizzagalli DA, Evins AE, Schetter EC, Frank MJ, Pajtas PE, Santesso DL,
Culhane M. Single dose of a dopamine agonist impairs reinforcement
learning in humans: behavioral evidence from a laboratory-based measure
of reward responsiveness. Psychopharmacology. 2008;196(2):221–232.
Quintana H, Cherlin EA, Duesenberg DA, Bangs ME, Ramsey JL. Transition
from methylphenidate or amphetamine to atomoxetine in children and
adolescents with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder: a preliminary
tolerability and efficacy study. Clin Ther. 2007;29(6):1168–1177.
Rothenhausler HB, Ehrentraut S, von Degenfeld G, Weis M, Tichy M.




<<<PAGE 3691>>>

Modafinil, 302
for ADHD, 137
for shift work sleep disorder, 514
Model penal code, 845
Modified HIV Dementia Scale, 258–259
Money, John, 894
Moniz, António Egaz, 740
Monoamine hypothesis, 398
Monoamine neurotransmitters, 954
Monoamine oxidase inhibitors, 389, 478, 591, 643, 644
and blood pressure measurement, 64
dosage and clinical guidelines, 646–647, 647t
drug interactions, 646
laboratory interferences, 646
pharmacologic actions, 645
precautions and adverse reactions, 645–646
therapeutic indications, 645
Monoamine oxidase type A (MAOA), 957, 1319
Monoamine oxidase type B (MAOB), 958
Monoamine receptors, 960t
Monoaminergic synapses, schematic, 957f
Montessori technique, 152
Montgomery-Asberg Depression Rating Scale (MADRS), 603
Mood
and affect, 9
initial assessment of, 9, 12t
Mood-congruent manic delusions, 365
Mood disorders, 385. See also Depression, Major Depressive Disorder
and Bipolar Disorder
alcohol-related disorders and, 280
misdiagnosis of, 385t
scales for assessment of, 39, 42–43t
Mood stabilizers, 591, 648–668. See also Lithium, Anticonvulsants
in autism spectrum disorder, 129
for early-onset bipolar disorder, 183
Moral development, in adolescence, 901–902
Moratorium (Ericksonian), 899


