<<<PAGE 342>>>

and Figure 2-4 demonstrates examples of the typical defects.
The entire syndrome occurs in up to 15 percent of babies born to women
who regularly ingest large amounts of alcohol. Babies born to women who
consume alcohol regularly during pregnancy have a high incidence of
ADHD, learning disorders, and intellectual disability without facial
dysmorphism.
Prenatal Drug Exposure. Prenatal exposure to opioids, such as heroin,
often results in infants who are small for their gestational age, with head
circumference below the tenth percentile and withdrawal symptoms that
appear within the first 2 days of life. The withdrawal symptoms of infants
include irritability, hypertonia, tremor, vomiting, a high-pitched cry, and an
abnormal sleep pattern. Seizures are unusual, but the withdrawal syndrome
can be life-threatening to infants if it is untreated. Diazepam, phenobarbital,
chlorpromazine, and paregoric have been used to treat neonatal opioid
withdrawal. The long-term sequelae of prenatal opioid exposure are not fully
known; the children’s developmental milestones and intellectual functions
may be within the normal range, but they have an increased risk for
impulsivity and behavioral problems. Infants prenatally exposed to cocaine
are at high risk for low birth weight and premature delivery. In the early
neonatal period, they may have transient neurologic and behavioral
abnormalities, including abnormal results on EEG studies, tachycardia, poor
feeding patterns, irritability, and excessive drowsiness. The physiologic and
behavioral abnormalities are from cocaine intoxication, not withdrawal, as
cocaine excretion may take up to a week after.
Table 2-3
Impairment in Disorders with Inborn Errors of Metabolism




<<<PAGE 1200>>>

Anticonvulsants. Valproate (valproic acid or divalproex sodium) has
surpassed lithium in use for acute mania. Unlike lithium, valproate is only
indicated for acute mania, although most experts agree it also has
prophylactic effects. Normal dose levels of valproic acid are 750 to 2,500
mg/day, achieving blood levels between 50 and 120 µg/mL. Rapid oral
loading with 15 to 20 mg/kg of divalproex sodium from day 1 of treatment
has been well tolerated and associated with a rapid onset of response. Some
laboratory testing is required during valproate treatment.
Carbamazepine has been used worldwide for decades as a first-line
treatment for acute mania. The FDA approved it for acute mania in the
United States in 2004. Typical doses of carbamazepine to treat acute mania
range between 600 and 1,800 mg/day associated with blood levels of between
4 and 12 µg/mL. The keto congener of carbamazepine, oxcarbazepine, is
better tolerated than carbamazepine, but the data for its efficacy are
conflicting. A Cochrane review concluded there is insufficient evidence for
this medication in acute mania.
Antipsychotics. The FDA approved many of the atypical antipsychotics for
use in bipolar disorder. We list them in Table 6-7. Compared with older
agents, such as haloperidol and chlorpromazine, atypical antipsychotics have
a lesser liability for excitatory postsynaptic potential and tardive dyskinesia;
many do not increase prolactin. However, many of them have the risk of
weight gain with its associated medical problems. Some patients, however,
require maintenance treatment with antipsychotic medication.
Acute Bipolar Depression
Lithium. There is limited evidence for lithium in bipolar depression. Early
studies were promising, but later placebo-controlled studies did not confirm
lithium’s efficacy. More extensive studies that included lithium did suggest
that lithium was at least as useful as other mood stabilizers for bipolar
depression.
Anticonvulsants. The most promising anticonvulsant has been lamotrigine,
which has several reasonable studies showing efficacy for bipolar depression.
Its major limitation is that it must be titrated gradually to prevent a severe




<<<PAGE 1681>>>

problem
No obvious nonpharmacologic
precipitant
Dissipates with drug
discontinuation
Antipsychotic drugs and
ejaculatory problems

Perphenazine
Chlorpromazine
Trifluoperazine
Haloperidol
Mesoridazine
Chlorprothixene

Antipsychotic drugs and priapism

Perphenazine
Mesoridazine
Chlorpromazine
Thioridazine
Fluphenazine
Molindone
Risperidone
Clozapine

Table by R. T. Seagraves, M.D.

Because depression is associated with decreased libido, varying levels of
sexual dysfunction and anhedonia are part of the disease process. Some
patients report improved sexual functioning as their depression improves
because of antidepressant medication. The phenomenon makes evaluating
sexual side effects difficult; also, the side effects may disappear with time,
perhaps because a biogenic amine homeostatic mechanism comes into play.




<<<PAGE 1909>>>

the patient’s consent, relatives and other clinicians should be instructed about
the reasons for the drug treatment, as well as the expected benefits and
potential risks.

DOSING, DURATION, AND MONITORING
Dosing
The clinically effective dose for treatment depends on the characteristics of
the drug and patient factors, such as inherited sensitivity and ability to
metabolize a drug, concurrent medical disorders, use of concurrent
medications, and history of exposure to previous medications.
Plasma concentrations of many psychotropics can vary up to 10-fold.
Thus, to some extent, the optimal dose for an individual is ultimately
determined by trial and error, guided by the empirical evidence of the usual
dose range for that drug. In some cases, it may prove helpful to test patients
for genetic polymorphisms involving hepatic enzymes. Patients who are
ultrarapid metabolizers of certain drugs may require higher than standard
dosing. Slow metabolizers might demonstrate side effects and even toxicity at
very low doses.
Some drugs demonstrate a clear relationship between increases in the dose
and clinical response. This dose–response curve plots the drug concentration
against the effects of the drug.
The potency of a drug refers to the relative dose required to achieve
specific effects, not to its efficacy. Haloperidol, for example, is more potent
than chlorpromazine (Thorazine) because approximately 5 mg of haloperidol
is required to achieve the same therapeutic effect as 100 mg of
chlorpromazine. These drugs, however, are equal in their clinical efficacy—
that is, the maximal clinical response achievable by the administration of a
drug.
Drugs must be used in effective dosages for sufficient periods. Although
drug tolerability and safety are always considerations, subtherapeutic doses
and incomplete therapeutic trials should be avoided. The use of inadequate
doses merely exposes the patient to the risk of side effects without providing
the probability of therapeutic benefit. Because of the wide margin of safety
associated with most currently prescribed medications, more risk exists in




<<<PAGE 1937>>>

drugs have been well studied. Phenytoin increases quetiapine clearance
fivefold; no significant pharmacokinetic interactions have been noted. Avoid
the use of quetiapine with drugs that increase the QT interval and in patients
with risk factors for prolonged QT interval. The FDA has added a new
warning about quetiapine, cautioning prescribers about potential prolongation
of the QT interval when above-recommended amounts of quetiapine are
combined with specific drugs. Quetiapine should not be combined with other
drugs that are known to prolong QTc. This includes class 1A antiarrhythmics
(e.g., quinidine, procainamide) or class III antiarrhythmics (e.g., amiodarone,
sotalol), antipsychotic medications (e.g., ziprasidone, chlorpromazine,
thioridazine), antibiotics (e.g., gatifloxacin, moxifloxacin), or any other class
of medications known to prolong the QTc interval (e.g., pentamidine,
levomethadyl acetate, methadone). Quetiapine should also be avoided in
circumstances that may increase the risk of occurrence of torsade de pointes
or sudden death, including (1) a history of cardiac arrhythmias such as
bradycardia; (2) hypokalemia or hypomagnesemia; (3) concomitant use of
other drugs that prolong the QTc interval; and (4) presence of congenital
prolongation of the QT interval. Postmarketing cases also show increases in
QT interval in patients who overdose on quetiapine.
Side Effects. Somnolence, postural hypotension, and dizziness are the most
common adverse effects of quetiapine. These are usually transient and are
best managed with initial gradual upward titration of the dosage. Quetiapine
is the SDA least likely to cause EPS, regardless of dose. This makes it
particularly useful in treating patients with Parkinson disease who develop
dopamine agonist-induced psychosis. Prolactin elevation is rare and both
transient and mild when it occurs. Quetiapine is associated with modest
transient weight gain in some persons, but some patients occasionally gain a
considerable amount of weight. The relationship between quetiapine and the
development of diabetes is not as clearly established as are the cases
involving the use of olanzapine. Small increases in heart rate, constipation,
and a transient increase in liver transaminases may also occur. Initial
concerns about cataract formation, based on animal studies, have not been
borne out since the drug has been in clinical use. Nevertheless, it might be
prudent to test for lens abnormalities early in treatment and periodically after
that.




<<<PAGE 1939>>>

Side Effects. Somnolence, headache, dizziness, nausea, and
lightheadedness are the most common adverse effects in patients taking
ziprasidone. The drug has almost no significant effects outside the CNS, is
associated with almost no weight gain, and does not cause sustained prolactin
elevation. Concerns about prolongation of the QTc complex have deterred
some clinicians from using ziprasidone as a first choice. The QTc interval has
been shown to increase in patients treated with 40 and 120 mg/day.
Ziprasidone is contraindicated in combination with other drugs known to
prolong the QTc interval. These include, but are not limited to, dofetilide,
sotalol, quinidine, other class IA and III antiarrhythmics, mesoridazine,
thioridazine,
chlorpromazine,
droperidol,
pimozide,
sparfloxacin,
gatifloxacin, moxifloxacin, halofantrine, mefloquine, pentamidine, arsenic
trioxide, levomethadyl acetate, dolasetron mesylate, probucol, and
tacrolimus. Ziprasidone should be avoided in patients with congenital long
QT syndrome and patients with a history of cardiac arrhythmias.
Aripiprazole (Abilify)
Aripiprazole is a potent 5-HT2A antagonist and is indicated for the treatment
of both schizophrenia and acute mania. It is also approved for the
augmentation of antidepressant agents in MDD. Aripiprazole is a D2
antagonist, but can also act as a partial D2 agonist. Partial D2 agonists
compete at D2 receptors for endogenous dopamine, thereby producing a
functional reduction of dopamine activity.
Indications. Aripiprazole is indicated for the treatment of schizophrenia.
Short-term, 4- to 6-week studies comparing aripiprazole with haloperidol and
risperidone in patients with schizophrenia and schizoaffective disorder have
shown comparable efficacy. Dosages of 15, 20, and 30 mg a day were found
to be effective. Long-term studies suggest that aripiprazole is effective as a
maintenance treatment at a daily dose of 15 to 30 mg.
Aripiprazole is also indicated for the acute and maintenance treatment of
manic and mixed episodes associated with bipolar I disorder. It is also used
as adjunctive therapy to either lithium or valproate for the acute treatment of
manic and mixed episodes associated with bipolar I disorder.
Aripiprazole is indicated for use as adjunctive therapy to antidepressants




<<<PAGE 1950>>>

DOPAMINE RECEPTOR ANTAGONISTS (FIRSTGENERATION ANTIPSYCHOTICS)
The DRAs represent the first group of effective agents for schizophrenia and
other psychotic illnesses. The first of these drugs, the phenothiazine
chlorpromazine (Thorazine), was introduced in the early 1950s. Other DRAs
include all of the antipsychotics in the following groups: phenothiazines,
butyrophenones, thioxanthenes, dibenzoxazepines, dihydroindoles, and
diphenylbutylpiperidines. Because these agents are associated with
extrapyramidal side effects (EPS) at clinically effective dosages, newer
antipsychotic drugs—the SDAs—have gradually replaced the older agents in
the United States. The SDAs are differentiated from earlier drugs by their
lower liability to cause extrapyramidal side effects. These newer drugs have
other liabilities, most notably a propensity to cause weight gain, lipid
elevations, and diabetes. Therefore, a reason to still consider the use of the
DRAs is their lower risk of causing significant metabolic abnormalities.
Intermediate-potency DRAs, such as perphenazine (Trilafon), are as effective
and well tolerated as the SDAs. Manufacturing of molindone (Moban), the
DRA with the lowest risk of weight gain and metabolic side effects, was
discontinued in the United States.
Table 21-9
Comparison of Usual Dosinga for Some Available SecondGeneration Antipsychotics in Schizophrenia




<<<PAGE 1953>>>

continued during the first month or so of depot antipsychotic treatment.
Antipsychotic activity derives from the inhibition of dopaminergic
neurotransmission. The DRAs are effective when approximately 72 percent
of dopamine D2 receptors in the brain are occupied. The DRAs also block
noradrenergic, cholinergic, and histaminergic receptors, with different drugs
having different effects on these receptor systems.
Some generalizations can be made about the DRAs based on their potency.
Potency refers to the amount of drug that is required to achieve therapeutic
effects. Low-potency drugs such as chlorpromazine and thioridazine
(Mellaril), given in doses of several 100 mg/day, typically produce more
weight gain and sedation than high-potency agents such as haloperidol and
fluphenazine, usually given in doses of less than 10 mg/day. High-potency
agents are also more likely to cause EPS. Some factors influencing the
pharmacologic actions of DRAs are listed in Table 21-10.
Therapeutic Indications
Many types of psychiatric and neurologic disorders may benefit from
treatment with DRAs. Some of these indications are shown in Table 21-11.
Schizophrenia and Schizoaffective Disorder. The DRAs are useful in
both the short- and long-term management of schizophrenia and
schizoaffective disorder. They both reduce acute symptoms and prevent
future exacerbations. These agents produce their most dramatic effects on the
positive symptoms of schizophrenia (e.g., hallucinations, delusions, and
agitation). Negative symptoms (e.g., emotional withdrawal and ambivalence)
are less likely to improve significantly, and they may appear to worsen
because these drugs produce constriction of facial expression and akinesia,
side effects that mimic negative symptoms.
Table 21-11
Indications for Dopamine Receptor Antagonists
Acute psychotic episodes in schizophrenia and schizoaffective
disorder
Maintenance treatment in schizophrenia and schizoaffective




<<<PAGE 1958>>>

women, and young persons are affected more commonly than are elderly
persons. The mortality rate can reach 20 to 30 percent, or even higher, when
depot medications are involved. Rates are also increased when high doses of
high-potency agents are used.
If the neuroleptic malignant syndrome is suspected, the DRA should be
stopped immediately, and the following done: medical support to cool the
person; monitoring of vital signs, electrolytes, fluid balance, and renal output;
and symptomatic treatment of fever. Antiparkinsonian medications may
reduce some of the muscle rigidity. Dantrolene (Dantrium), a skeletal muscle
relaxant (0.8 to 2.5 mg/kg every 6 hours, up to a total dosage of 10 mg a day),
may be useful in the treatment of this disorder. When the person can take oral
medications, dantrolene can be given in doses of 100 to 200 mg a day.
Bromocriptine (20 to 30 mg a day in four divided doses) or amantadine can
be added to the regimen. Treatment should usually be continued for 5 to 10
days. When drug treatment is restarted, the clinician should consider
switching to a low-potency drug or an SDA, although these agents—
including clozapine—may also cause the neuroleptic malignant syndrome.
Seizure Threshold. DRAs may lower the seizure threshold.
Chlorpromazine, thioridazine, and other low-potency drugs are thought to be
more epileptogenic than are high-potency drugs. The risk of inducing a
seizure by drug administration warrants consideration when the person
already has a seizure disorder or brain lesion.
Sedation. The blockade of histamine H1 receptors is the usual cause of
sedation associated with DRAs. Chlorpromazine is the most sedating typical
antipsychotic. The relative sedative properties of the drugs are summarized in
Table 21-12. Giving the entire daily dose at bedtime usually eliminates any
problems from sedation, and tolerance for this adverse effect often develops.
Central Anticholinergic Effects. The symptoms of central
anticholinergic activity include severe agitation; disorientation to time,
person, and place; hallucinations; seizures; high fever; and dilated pupils.
Stupor and coma may ensue. The treatment of anticholinergic toxicity
consists of discontinuing the causal agent or agents, close medical
supervision, and physostigmine (Antilirium, Eserine), 2 mg by slow




<<<PAGE 1959>>>

intravenous (IV) infusion, repeated within 1 hour as necessary. Too much
physostigmine is dangerous, and symptoms of physostigmine toxicity include
hypersalivation and sweating. Atropine sulfate (0.5 mg) can reverse the
effects of physostigmine toxicity.
Cardiac Effects. The DRAs decrease cardiac contractility, disrupt enzyme
contractility in cardiac cells, increase circulating levels of catecholamines,
and prolong atrial and ventricular conduction time and refractory periods.
Low-potency DRAs, particularly the phenothiazines, are usually more
cardiotoxic than are high-potency drugs. One exception is haloperidol, which
has been linked to abnormal heart rhythm, ventricular arrhythmias, torsades
de pointes, and sudden death when injected IV. Pimozide, sulpiride, and
droperidol (a butyrophenone) also prolong the QTc interval and have been
associated with torsades de pointes and sudden death. In one study,
thioridazine was responsible for 28 (61 percent) of the 46 sudden
antipsychotic deaths. In 15 of these cases, it was the only drug ingested.
Chlorpromazine also causes prolongation of the QT and PR intervals,
blunting of the T waves, and depression of the ST segment. These drugs are
thus indicated only when other agents have been ineffective.
Sudden Death. Occasional reports of sudden cardiac death during
treatment with DRAs may be the result of cardiac arrhythmias. Other causes
may include seizure, asphyxiation, malignant hyperthermia, heatstroke, and
neuroleptic malignant syndrome. However, there does seem to be an overall
increased incidence of sudden death with antipsychotics.
Orthostatic (Postural) Hypotension. Orthostatic (postural) hypotension
is most frequent with low-potency drugs, particularly chlorpromazine,
thioridazine, and chlorprothixene. When using intramuscular (IM) lowpotency DRAs, the clinician should measure the patient’s BP (lying and
standing) before and after the first dose and during the first few days of
treatment.
Orthostatic hypotension is mediated by adrenergic blockade and occurs
most frequently during the first few days of treatment. Tolerance often
develops for this side effect, which is why the initial dosing of these drugs is
lower than the usual therapeutic dose. Fainting or falls, although uncommon,




<<<PAGE 1961>>>

paralytic ileus, although the relief is only transitory. Bethanechol
(Urecholine) (20 to 40 mg a day) may be useful in some persons with urinary
retention.
Weight gain is associated with increased mortality and morbidity and with
medication noncompliance. Low-potency DRAs may cause significant
weight gain but not as much as is seen with the SDAs olanzapine (Zyprexa)
and clozapine (Clozaril). Molindone and perhaps loxapine (Loxitane) appear
to be least likely to cause weight gain.
Endocrine Effects. Blockade of the dopamine receptors in the
tuberoinfundibular tract results in the increased secretion of prolactin, which
can result in breast enlargement, galactorrhea, amenorrhea, and inhibited
orgasm in women and impotence in men. The SDAs, except risperidone
(Risperdal), are not significantly associated with an increase in prolactin
levels and may be the drugs of choice for persons experiencing disturbing
side effects from increased prolactin release.
Sexual Adverse Effects. Both men and women taking DRAs can
experience anorgasmia and decreased libido. Up to 50 percent of men who
take antipsychotics report ejaculatory and erectile disturbances. Sildenafil
(Viagra), vardenafil (Levitra), and tadalafil (Cialis) are often used to treat
psychotropic-induced orgasmic dysfunction, but they have not been studied
in combination with the DRAs. Thioridazine is mainly associated with
decreased libido and retrograde ejaculation in men. Priapism and reports of
painful orgasms have also been described, both possibly resulting from α1adrenergic antagonist activity.
Skin and Eye Effects. Allergic dermatitis and photosensitivity may occur,
especially with low-potency agents. Urticarial, maculopapular, petechial, and
edematous eruptions may occur early in treatment, generally in the first few
weeks, and remit spontaneously. A photosensitivity reaction that resembles a
severe sunburn also occurs in some persons taking chlorpromazine. Persons
should be warned of this adverse effect, should spend no more than 30 to 60
minutes in the sun, and should use sunscreens. Long-term chlorpromazine
use is associated with blue-gray discoloration of skin areas exposed to
sunlight. The skin changes often begin with a tan or golden brown color and




<<<PAGE 1962>>>

progress to such colors as slate gray, metallic blue, and purple. These
discolorations resolve when the patient is switched to another medication.
Irreversible retinal pigmentation is associated with the use of thioridazine
at dosages above 1,000 mg a day. An early symptom of the side effect can
sometimes be nocturnal confusion related to difficulty with night vision. The
pigmentation can progress even after thioridazine administration is stopped,
finally resulting in blindness. It is for this reason that the maximum
recommended dosage of thioridazine is 800 mg/day.
Patients taking chlorpromazine may develop a relatively benign
pigmentation of the eyes, characterized by whitish brown granular deposits
concentrated in the anterior lens and posterior cornea and visible only by slitlens examination. The deposits can progress to opaque white and yellowbrown granules, often stellate. Occasionally, the conjunctiva is discolored by
a brown pigment. No retinal damage is seen, and vision is rarely impaired.
This condition gradually resolves when chlorpromazine is discontinued.
Jaundice. Elevations of liver enzymes during treatment with a DRA tend to
be transient and not clinically significant. When chlorpromazine first came
into use, cases of obstructive or cholestatic jaundice were reported, usually in
the first month of treatment and heralded by symptoms of upper abdominal
pain, nausea, and vomiting. This adverse effect was followed by fever, rash,
eosinophilia, bilirubin in the urine, and increases in levels of serum bilirubin,
alkaline phosphatase, and hepatic transaminases. Reported cases are now
sporadic, but if jaundice occurs, the medication should be discontinued.
Overdoses. Overdoses typically consist of exaggerated DRA side effects.
Symptoms and signs include CNS depression, EPS, mydriasis, rigidity,
restlessness, decreased deep tendon reflexes, tachycardia, and hypotension.
The severe symptoms of overdose include delirium, coma, respiratory
depression, and seizures. Haloperidol may be among the safest typical
antipsychotics in overdose. After an overdose, electroencephalography (EEG)
shows diffuse slowing and low voltage. An extreme overdose may lead to
delirium and coma, with respiratory depression and hypotension. Lifethreatening overdose usually involves the ingestion of other CNS
depressants, such as alcohol or benzodiazepines.
Activated charcoal, if possible, and gastric lavage should be administered




<<<PAGE 1968>>>

phenylketonuria.
Dosage and Clinical Guidelines
Contraindications to the use of DRAs include the following: (1) a history of a
severe allergic response; (2) the possible ingestion of a substance that will
interact with the antipsychotic to induce CNS depression (e.g., alcohol,
opioids, barbiturates, and benzodiazepines) or anticholinergic delirium (e.g.,
scopolamine and possibly phencyclidine [PCP]); (3) the presence of a severe
cardiac abnormality; (4) a high risk for seizures; (5) the presence of narrowangle glaucoma or prostatic hypertrophy if a drug with high anticholinergic
activity is to be used; and (6) the presence or a history of tardive dyskinesia.
Antipsychotics should be administered with caution in persons with hepatic
disease because impaired hepatic metabolism may result in high plasma
concentrations. The usual assessment should include a CBC with WBC
indexes, liver function tests, and electrocardiography (ECG), especially in
women older than 40 years of age and men older than 30 years of age.
Elderly persons and children are more sensitive to side effects than are young
adults, so the dosage of the drug should be adjusted accordingly.
Various patients may respond to widely different dosages of
antipsychotics; therefore, there is no set dosage for any given antipsychotic
drug. Because of side effects, it is a reasonable clinical practice to begin at a
low dosage and increase as necessary. It is important to remember that the
maximal effects of a particular dosage may not be evident for 4 to 6 weeks.
Available preparations and dosages of the DRAs are given in Table 21-14.
Short-Term Treatment. The equivalent of 5 to 20 mg of haloperidol is a
reasonable dose for an adult in an acute state. An older adult may benefit
from as little as 1 mg of haloperidol. The administration of more than 25 mg
of chlorpromazine in one injection may result in profound hypotension. IM
administration results in peak plasma levels in about 30 minutes versus 90
minutes using the oral route. Doses of drugs for IM administration are about
half those given by the oral route. In a short-term treatment setting, the
person should be observed for 1 hour after the first dose of medication. After
that time, most clinicians administer a second dose or a sedative agent (e.g., a
benzodiazepine) to achieve effective behavioral control. Possible sedatives




<<<PAGE 1969>>>

include lorazepam (Ativan) (2 mg IM) and amobarbital (50 to 250 mg IM).
Rapid Neuroleptization. Rapid neuroleptization (also called
psychotolysis) is the practice of administering hourly IM doses of
antipsychotic medications until marked sedation is achieved. However,
several research studies have shown that merely waiting several more hours
after one dose yields the same clinical improvement as is seen with repeated
doses. Nevertheless, clinicians must be careful to keep patients from
becoming violent while they are psychotic. Clinicians can help prevent
violent episodes by using adjuvant sedatives or by temporarily using physical
restraints until the persons can control their behavior.
Early Treatment. A full 6 weeks may be necessary to evaluate the extent of
the improvement in psychotic symptoms. However, agitation and excitement
usually improve quickly with antipsychotic treatment. About 75 percent of
persons with a short history of illness show significant improvement in their
psychosis. Psychotic symptoms, both positive and negative, usually continue
to improve 3 to 12 months after the initiation of treatment.
About 5 mg of haloperidol or 300 mg of chlorpromazine is a usual
effective daily dose. In the past, much higher doses were used, but evidence
suggests that it resulted in more side effects without additional benefits. A
single daily dose is usually given at bedtime to help induce sleep and to
reduce the incidence of adverse effects. However, bedtime dosing for elderly
persons may increase their risk of falling if they get out of bed during the
night. The sedative effects of typical antipsychotics last only a few hours, in
contrast to the antipsychotic effects, which last for 1 to 3 days.
Intermittent Medications. It is a common clinical practice to order
medications to be given intermittently as needed (PRN). Although this
practice may be reasonable during the first few days that a person is
hospitalized, the amount of time the person takes antipsychotic drugs, rather
than an increase in dosage, is what produces therapeutic improvement.
Clinicians on inpatient services may feel pressured by staff members to write
PRN antipsychotic orders; such orders should include specific symptoms,
how often the drugs should be given, and how many doses can be given each
day. Clinicians may choose to use small doses for the PRN doses (e.g., 2 mg




<<<PAGE 1972>>>

drug should be determined if feasible. After a patient has been on a particular
dosage for at least five times the half-life of the drug and thus approaches
steady-state concentrations, blood levels may be helpful. It is standard
practice to obtain plasma samples at trough levels—just before the daily dose
is given, usually at least 12 hours after the previous dose, and most
commonly 20 to 24 hours after the previous dose. Most antipsychotics have
no well-defined dose–response curve. The best-studied drug is haloperidol,
which may have a therapeutic window ranging from 2 to 15 ng/mL. Other
therapeutic ranges that have been reasonably well documented are 30 to 100
ng/mL for chlorpromazine and 0.8 to 2.4 ng/mL for perphenazine.
Treatment-Resistant Persons. Unfortunately, 10 to 35 percent of
persons with schizophrenia do not obtain significant benefit from the
antipsychotic drugs. Treatment resistance is a failure on at least two adequate
trials of antipsychotics from two pharmacologic classes. It is useful to
determine plasma concentrations for such persons because it is possible that
they are slow or rapid metabolizers or are not taking their medication.
Clozapine has been conclusively shown to be effective when given to patients
who have failed multiple trials of DRAs.
Adjunctive Medications. It is common practice to use DRAs in
conjunction with other psychotropic agents, either to treat side effects or to
improve symptoms further. Most commonly, this involves the use of lithium
or other mood-stabilizing agents, SSRIs, or benzodiazepines. It was once held
that antidepressant drugs exacerbated psychosis in patients with
schizophrenia. In all likelihood, this observation involved patients with
bipolar disorder who were misdiagnosed as having schizophrenia. Abundant
evidence suggests that antidepressants improve symptoms of depression in
patients with schizophrenia. In some cases, amphetamines can be added to
DRAs if patients remain withdrawn and apathetic.
Choice of Drug
Given their proven efficacy in managing acute psychotic symptoms and the
fact that prophylactic administration of antiparkinsonian medication prevents
or minimizes acute motor abnormalities, DRAs are still valuable, especially
for short-term therapy. There is a considerable cost advantage to a DRA




<<<PAGE 1990>>>

Electrolyte and Glucose Disturbances. The SSRIs may acutely
decrease glucose concentrations; therefore, diabetic patients should be
carefully monitored. Long-term use may be associated with increased glucose
levels, although it remains to be proven whether this is the result of a
pharmacologic effect. Antidepressant users may have other characteristics
that raise their odds of developing diabetes, or may be more likely to be
diagnosed with diabetes or other medical conditions as a result of being in
treatment for depression.
Cases of SSRI-associated hyponatremia and the syndrome of inappropriate
antidiuretic hormone have been seen in some patients, especially those who
are older or treated with diuretics.
Endocrine and Allergic Reactions. The SSRIs can increase prolactin
levels and cause mammoplasia and galactorrhea in both men and women.
Breast changes are reversible upon discontinuation of the drug, but this may
take several months to occur.
Various types of rashes appear in about 4 percent of all patients; in a small
subset of these patients, the allergic reaction may generalize and involve the
pulmonary system, rarely resulting in fibrotic damage and dyspnea. SSRI
treatment may have to be discontinued in patients with drug-related rashes.
Serotonin Syndrome. Concurrent administration of an SSRI with an
MAOI, L-tryptophan, or lithium (Eskalith) can raise plasma serotonin
concentrations to toxic levels, producing a constellation of symptoms called
serotonin syndrome. This severe and possibly fatal syndrome of serotonin
overstimulation comprises, in order of appearance as the condition worsens,
(1) diarrhea; (2) restlessness; (3) extreme agitation, hyperreflexia, and
autonomic instability with possible rapid fluctuations in vital signs; (4)
myoclonus, seizures, hyperthermia, uncontrollable shivering, and rigidity;
and (5) delirium, coma, status epilepticus, cardiovascular collapse, and death.
Treatment of serotonin syndrome consists of removing the offending
agents and promptly instituting comprehensive supportive care. Supportive
care and treatment may include nitroglycerine, cyproheptadine (Periactin),
methysergide (Sansert), cooling blankets, chlorpromazine (Thorazine),
dantrolene (Dantrium), benzodiazepines, anticonvulsants, mechanical
ventilation, and paralyzing agents.




<<<PAGE 2038>>>

Others: Banana or avocado (ripe or not), banana peel
aAny food left out to age or spoil can spontaneously develop tyramine through fermentation.
bAlcohol can produce profound orthostasis interacting with monoamine oxidase inhibitors

(MAOIs) but cannot produce direct hypotensive reactions.
cWhite wines, gin, and vodka have no tyramine content.
Table by Jonathan M. Himmelhoch, M.D.

An MAOI-induced hypertensive crisis should be treated with α-adrenergic
antagonists—for example, phentolamine (Regitine) or chlorpromazine
(Thorazine). These drugs lower BP within 5 minutes. IV furosemide (Lasix)
can be used to reduce fluid load, and a β-adrenergic receptor antagonist can
control tachycardia. A sublingual 10-mg dose of nifedipine (Procardia) can
be given and repeated after 20 minutes. Persons with thyrotoxicosis or
pheochromocytoma should not use MAOIs.
The risk of tyramine-induced hypertensive crises is relatively low for
persons who are taking RIMAs, such as moclobemide and befloxatone. These
drugs have relatively little inhibitory activity for MAOB, and because they are
reversible, regular activity of existing MAOA returns within 16 to 48 hours of
the last dose of a RIMA. Therefore, the dietary restrictions are less stringent
for RIMAs, applying only to foods containing high concentrations of
tyramine, which need to be avoided for 3 days after the last dose of a RIMA.
A reasonable dietary recommendation for persons taking RIMAs is to avoid
eating tyramine-containing foods 1 hour before and 2 hours after taking a
RIMA.
Spontaneous, nontyramine-induced hypertensive crisis is a rare occurrence,
usually shortly after the first exposure of an MAOI. Persons experiencing
such a crisis should avoid MAOIs altogether.
Withdrawal. Abrupt cessation of regular doses of MAOIs may cause a selflimited discontinuation syndrome consisting of arousal, mood disturbances,
and somatic symptoms. Dosages should be gradually tapered over several
weeks to avoid these symptoms.
Overdose. It often takes 1 to 6 hours after an overdose for the toxic
symptoms to occur. MAOI overdose is characterized by agitation that can
progress to coma with hyperthermia, hypertension, tachypnea, tachycardia,




<<<PAGE 3464>>>

Biologic models had existed before. For example, in the 1930s, Papez
theorized that emotions were caused by a circuit connecting the limbic lobe,
amygdala, septal region, and hippocampus. Electroconvulsive therapy was
also developed in the 1930s and used to treat depression as early as the
1940s.
An early influence on biologic explanations for etiology was Otto Loewi’s
discovery of acetylcholine’s role as a neurotransmitter. In proving this, Loewi
(Fig. 35-10) employed a now-famous experiment, published in 1921, in
which he used the saline solution from one frog heart to stimulate the rate in a
second denervated heart, thus proving that a chemical must control the heart
rate. He later showed that this chemical was acetylcholine. This was the first
experiment that showed that a chemical could cause a response absent of
electrical stimulation, thus discovering the critical role of neurotransmitters.
Loewi’s experiment is famous, not only for its scientific value but also
that the idea for the experiment came in a dream. Although he wrote
down the dream when briefly waking from it, he could not make sense of
his scribbles the next morning. Fortunately, he went on to have the same
dream the next night, and when awakening from that, he rushed to his
laboratory to perform what would become Nobel Prize-winning research.
The practical beginning of biologic psychiatry occurred with the
serendipitous discovery of several drugs that could treat mental disorders,
including chlorpromazine for schizophrenia, imipramine and iproniazid for
depression, and lithium carbonate for bipolar disorder. In each case, the initial
importance of the drug was not appreciated. For example, chlorpromazine
was synthesized from promethazine, an antihistamine, in a search for more
stable antihistamine sedatives. It was initially used as an anesthetic adjunct,
and its antipsychotic properties were only later recognized after psychiatrists
began administering it to manic and psychotic patients, again originally as a
sedative.
Imipramine was also first synthesized as an antihistamine, and, following
in the footsteps of chlorpromazine, tried as an antipsychotic before some case
reports convinced the manufacturers to investigate its role as an
antidepressant. Supporting these findings was the discovery that certain




<<<PAGE 3622>>>

memory, 80
mood, 79
motor behavior, 80
orientation, 79
parent–child interaction, 79
physical appearance, 79
separation and reunion, 79
social relatedness, 80
speech and language, 79
thought process and content, 79–80
questionnaires and rating scales, 78
recommendations and treatment plan, 84
Children’s Apperception Test (CAT), 84
Children’s Depression Rating Scale-Revised (CDRS-R), 176, 177
Children’s Interview for Psychiatric Syndromes (ChIPS), 77–78
Children’s Personality Questionnaire, 83t
Chinese Classification of Mental Disorders (CCMD-2-R), 1056
Chloral hydrate, 298, 678–679
Chlordiazepoxide, for alcohol withdrawal treatment, 281
Chlorpromazine, 602, 619, 622
for schizophrenia, 353t
Cholecystokinin (CCK), 479, 969
Cholinesterase inhibitors, 696, 959, 986
dosage and clinical guidelines, 698
drug interactions, 698
pharmacologic actions, 697
precautions and adverse reactions, 697–698, 698t
therapeutic indications, 697
Chorionic villi sampling (CVS), 97
Chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS), 986
immune component of, 985
Chronic grief, 851
Chronic illness care model, 874
Chronic motor or vocal tic disorder, 162
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), and insomnia, 491
Chronobiology, 1001–1002
Chronotherapy, 514–515




<<<PAGE 3755>>>

Thanatos, 1061
Thematic Apperception Test (TAT), 59–60, 59f, 59t, 83t, 84
Theory of Psychoanalytic Technique (Menninger), 1085
Therapeutic alliance, 2–3
Therapeutic communities, 296
Therapeutic-graded exposure, 772
Therapeutic index, 600
Therapeutic trial of a drug, 603
Thermocapsulotomy, 742
Theta waves, 999
Thiamine, 277, 284
deficiency, 262
Thiazides, 601
Thioridazine, 19, 593
and QTc prolongation, 67
Third-generation antidepressants, 591
Third individuation, 906
Thorazine. See Chlorpromazine
Thorndike, Edward, 1018
Thought blocking, 10t
Thought content
compulsions, 9
delusions, 9–10
in initial psychiatric interview, 9–10, 13t
obsessional thoughts, 9
Thought process
formal disorders, 10t
initial assessment of, 10, 13t
Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality (Freud), 1061
Thyroid axis activity, 395
Thyroid disorders, 65, 260–261
Thyroid function tests, 648
Thyroid hormones
dosage and clinical guidelines, 648
drug interactions, 647
laboratory interferences, 648
pharmacologic actions, 647


