<<<PAGE 413>>>

appetite, metabolic side effects such as hyperglycemia, prolactin elevation,
and dyslipidemia, along with other common adverse effects such as fatigue,
drowsiness, dizziness, and drooling, have limited its use in some individuals.
Risperidone should be used with caution in individuals with underlying
cardiac abnormalities or hypotension, since risperidone may contribute to
orthostatic hypotension. In further continuation studies of risperidone in the
treatment of irritability in autism spectrum disorder, persistent efficacy and
tolerability were found over 6 months, with a rapid return of symptoms in
good responders when discontinuing the risperidone. Other drugs studied in
the treatment of irritability in autism spectrum disorder include aripiprazole
and olanzapine.
Two extensive studies utilizing aripiprazole in the treatment of tantrums,
aggression, and self-injury in children and adolescents with autism spectrum
disorder found that aripiprazole was both efficacious and safe. Doses ranged
from 5 to 15 mg/day. The main side effects included sedation, dizziness,
insomnia, akathisia, nausea, and vomiting. Although weight gain was not as
pronounced as with risperidone, it was still considered a moderate adverse
event, with approximately 1.3 to 1.5 kg gained during an 8-week study
period. The weight gain was similar at the lower and higher doses.
Olanzapine, which blocks 5-HT2A and D2 receptors and also blocks
muscarinic receptors, has been studied in children and adolescents with
autism spectrum disorder for the treatment of irritability with a trend toward a
positive response; however, significant weight gain of approximately 3.5 kg
occurred. The main side effect was sedation.
Hyperactivity, Impulsivity, and Inattention. There have been several
randomized placebo-controlled trials of methylphenidate for the treatment of
hyperactivity, impulsivity, and inattention in children and adolescents with
autism spectrum disorder. The Research Units of Pediatric
Psychopharmacology found methylphenidate to be at least moderately
efficacious at doses of 0.25 to 0.5 mg/kg for youth with autism spectrum
disorder and ADHD symptoms. The efficacy of methylphenidate in this
population was less effective than in children with ADHD without autism
spectrum disorder, and children with autism spectrum disorder developed
more frequent side effects, including increased irritability, compared to
ADHD children. A study of methylphenidate in the treatment of hyperactivity




<<<PAGE 512>>>

agonist and a 5-HT2A antagonist. A multisite double-blind controlled study of
aripiprazole in children with Tourette disorder in China found a reduction in
tic behaviors in about 60 percent of the aripiprazole group compared to about
64 percent reduction in a group treated with tiapride, a benzamide with
selective D2 receptor antagonism. There was no significant difference
between the two groups. Although sedation and sleep disturbance are
common side effects with aripiprazole, weight gain is less pronounced than
with risperidone.
Olanzapine and ziprasidone are also efficacious in the treatment of tic
disorders in at least one RCT. Sedation and weight gain were prominent side
effects with olanzapine, and potential QT prolongation was an issue with
ziprasidone. Quetiapine is a potentially useful agent in the treatment of tics,
with its higher affinity for 5-HT2 receptors than for D2 receptors. However,
randomized clinical trials are needed. Clozapine, contrary to many other
atypical antipsychotics, is not useful in the treatment of tics.
NORADRENERGIC AGENTS.

Noradrenergic agents, including clonidine and
guanfacine, as well as atomoxetine, are frequently used in children as primary
treatments or adjunctive treatments for comorbid ADHD and tics. Several
studies have provided some evidence for the efficacy of clonidine, an α2adrenergic agent, in the treatment of tics in children, adolescents, and adults
with tic disorders. The largest randomized trial with oral clonidine compared
to placebo found a modest reduction in tics with clonidine. A multisite
randomized, double-blind placebo-controlled trial using the clonidine patch
in the treatment of tic disorders in children found a significant improvement
in tic symptoms (about 69 percent) compared to about 47 percent of the
children in the control group. The usual dose range for clonidine is from 0.05
mg orally three times daily to 0.1 mg four times daily, and for guanfacine, it
is from 1 to 4 mg/day. When used in these dosage ranges, adverse effects of
the α-adrenergic agents may include drowsiness, headache, irritability, and
occasional hypotension.
Guanfacine can treat children with ADHD successfully, although its
efficacy regarding reducing tics is controversial. In one randomized clinical
trial treating 34 children with ADHD and tics, guanfacine was superior to
placebo in the reduction of tics. In another double-blind placebo-controlled




<<<PAGE 665>>>

social skills deficits, attention deficits, and academic difficulties that often
accompany childhood-onset schizophrenia.
Pharmacotherapy
Second-generation antipsychotics, serotonin-dopamine antagonists, are the
current mainstay pharmacologic treatments for children and adolescents with
schizophrenia. Current data include six randomized clinical trials in youth
investigating the efficacy of second-generation antipsychotics for early-onset
schizophrenia, with limited support for one agent over the others. Although
clozapine, a serotonin receptor antagonist with some dopamine (D2)
antagonism, may be more effective in reducing positive and negative
symptoms, it remains a choice of last resort in youth based on its side effects.
To date, however, evidence from multisite randomized clinical trials supports
some efficacy of risperidone, olanzapine, aripiprazole, and clozapine in the
treatment of childhood- and adolescent-onset schizophrenia. Two randomized
clinical trials using risperidone in adolescents with schizophrenia found
risperidone at doses up to 3 mg/day to be superior to placebo. A multisite
randomized 6-week controlled trial of olanzapine in adolescents with
schizophrenia found that it was more efficacious than a placebo. An RCT of
aripiprazole at two fixed doses found that it was superior to placebo in the
treatment of positive symptoms of adolescent schizophrenia; however, more
than 40 percent of subjects in the active medication group did not achieve
remission. Finally, clozapine is more effective than haloperidol in improving
both positive and negative symptoms in treatment-resistant schizophrenia in
youth. More recently, a study compared clozapine to high doses of
olanzapine and found that response rates were about twice as high for
clozapine as olanzapine (66 percent vs. 33 percent) when the investigators
defined response as 30 percent or better reduction in symptoms on the Brief
Psychiatric Rating Scale and improvement on the Clinical Global Impression
Scale. The Treatment of Early-Onset Schizophrenia Spectrum Disorders
Study compared the efficacy of risperidone and olanzapine with those of
molindone, a mid-potency first-generation antipsychotic. In this study,
lacking a placebo group, each of these agents provided a similar therapeutic
effect; however, fewer than half of the patients responded optimally. Despite
the limited randomized controlled studies of second-generation




<<<PAGE 666>>>

antipsychotics for the treatment of schizophrenia in youth, the FDA is
progressively approving the use of these agents for pediatric schizophrenia
and bipolar illness. In 2007, the FDA approved the use of risperidone and
aripiprazole for the treatment of schizophrenia in 13- to 17-year-olds. The
FDA approved the use of olanzapine and quetiapine in 2009 for the treatment
of schizophrenia in 13- to 17-year-olds. Lurasidone and paliperidone were
approved by the FDA in 2017 for the treatment of schizophrenia in
adolescents.
A double-blind, randomized 8-week controlled trial compared the efficacy
and safety of olanzapine to clozapine in childhood-onset schizophrenia.
Children with childhood-onset schizophrenia who were resistant to at least
two previous treatments with antipsychotics were randomized to treatment
for 8 weeks with either olanzapine or clozapine followed by a 2-year openlabel follow-up. Using the Clinical Global Impression of Severity of
Symptoms Scale and Schedule for the Assessment of Negative/Positive
Symptoms, clozapine was associated with a significant reduction in all
outcome measures. In contrast, olanzapine showed improvement on some
measures but not on all. The only statistically significant measure in which
clozapine was superior to olanzapine was in alleviating negative symptoms
compared with baseline. Clozapine was associated with more adverse events,
such as lipid abnormalities and a seizure in one patient.
Several studies have provided evidence that risperidone, a benzisoxazole
derivative, is as effective as the older high-potency first-generation
antipsychotics, such as haloperidol, and causes less frequent severe side
effects in the treatment of schizophrenia in older adolescents and adults.
Published case reports and limited more extensive controlled studies have
supported the efficacy of risperidone in the treatment of psychosis in children
and adolescents. Risperidone can cause weight gain and dystonic reactions
and other extrapyramidal adverse effects in children and adolescents.
Olanzapine is generally well tolerated for extrapyramidal adverse effects
compared with first-generation antipsychotics and risperidone, but it is
associated with moderate sedation and significant weight gain.
Psychosocial Interventions
Psychosocial interventions aimed at family education and patient and family




<<<PAGE 721>>>

schizophrenia. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2006;141:192.
Kryzhanovskaya L, Schulz SC, McDougle C, Frazier J, Dittmann R,
Robertson-Plouch C, Bauer T, Xu W, Wang W, Carlson J, Tohen M.
Olanzapine versus placebo in adolescents with schizophrenia: a 6-week,
randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. J Am Acad Child
Adolesc Psychiatry. 2009;48:60–70.
Kumra S, Kranzler H, Gerbine-Rosen G, Kester HM, De Thomas C,
Kafantaris V, Correll C, Kane J. Clozapine and ‘high-dose’ olanzapine in
refractory early-onset schizophrenia: a 12-week randomized and doubleblind comparison. Biol Psychiatry. 2008;63:524–529.
McGlashan TH, Zipursky RB, Perkins D, Addington J, Miller T, Woods SW,
Hawkins KA, Hoffman RE, Preda A, Epstein I, Addington D, Lindborg S,
Trzaskoma Q, Tohen M, Breier A. Randomized, double-blind trial of
olanzapine versus placebo in patients prodromally symptomatic for
psychosis. Am J Psychiatry. 2006;163:790–799.
McGorry PD, Nelson B, Amminger GP, Bechdolf A, Francey SM, Berger G,
Riecher-Rössler A, Klosterkötter J, Ruhrmann S, Schultze-Lutter F,
Nordentoft M, Hickie I, McGuire P, Berk M, Chen EY, Keshavan MS,
Yung AR. Intervention in individuals at ultra-high risk for psychosis: a
review and future directions. J Clin Psychiatry. 2009;70:1206–1212.
McGorry PD, Yung AR, Phillips LJ, Yuen HP, Francey S, Cosgrave EM,
Germano D, Bravin J, McDonald T, Blair A, Adlard S, Jackson H.
Randomized controlled trial of interventions designed to reduce the risk of
progression to first episode psychosis in a clinical sample with
subthreshold symptoms. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2002;59:921–928.
McGurk SR, Twamlety EW, Sitezer DL, McHugo JG, Mueser KT. A metaanalysis of cognitive remediation in schizophrenia. Am J Psychiatry.
2007;164:1791–1802.
Morrison AP, French P, Walford L, Lewis SW, Kilcommons A, Green J,
Parker S, Bentall R. Cognitive therapy for the prevention of psychosis in
people at ultra-high risk: randomised controlled trial. Br J Psychiatry.
2004;185:291–297.
Peterson L, Jeppesen P, Thorup A, Abel MB, Øhlenschlaeger J, Christenson
TØ, Krarup G, J⊘rgensen P, Nordentoft M. A randomised multicentre trial
of integrated verus standard treatment of patients with a first episode of
psychotic illness. BMJ. 2005;331:602.




<<<PAGE 750>>>

Risperidone

0.5–1 mg a EPS concerns
day

Limited data in
delirium

Olanzapine

5–10 mg a
day

Higher mortality
in dementia
patients

Quetiapine

25–150 mg More sedating
a day

Metabolic
syndrome

Benzodiazepine
Lorazepam

0.5–3 mg a Respiratory
day and
depression,
as
paradoxical
needed
agitation
every 4
hr

Best use in
delirium
secondary to
alcohol or
benzodiazepine
withdrawal
Can worsen other
types of
delirium

EPIDEMIOLOGY
Delirium is a common disorder, with most incidence and prevalence rates
reported in elderly adults. In community studies, 1 percent of elderly persons
age 55 years or older have delirium (13 percent in the age 85 years and older
group in the community). Among elderly emergency department patients, 5
to 10 percent have delirium. At the time of admission to medical wards,
between 15 and 21 percent of older patients meet the criteria for deliriumprevalent cases. Of patients free of delirium at the time of hospital admission,
5 to 30 percent reported subsequent incidences of delirium during
hospitalization. Delirium occurs in 10 to 15 percent of general surgical
patients, 30 percent of open-heart surgery patients, and more than 50 percent
of patients treated for hip fractures. Delirium occurs in 70 to 87 percent of
intensive care unit patients and up to 83 percent of all patients receiving end
of life care. Sixty percent of patients in nursing homes or post-acute care




<<<PAGE 1901>>>

recovery. Treatment-emergent increase in body weight is a common reason
for noncompliance with a drug regimen. No specific mechanisms have been
identified as causing weight gain, and it appears that the histamine and
serotonin systems mediate changes in weight associated with many drugs
used to treat depression and psychosis. Metformin (Glucophage) has been
reported to facilitate weight loss among patients whose weight gain is
attributed to the use of serotonin-dopamine reuptake inhibitors and valproic
acid (Depakene). Valproate (Depacon), as well as olanzapine, has been linked
to the development of insulin resistance, which could induce appetite
increase, with the subsequent weight increase. Weight gain is a noteworthy
side effect of clozapine (Clozaril) and olanzapine. Genetic factors that
regulate body weight, as well as the related problem of diabetes mellitus,
seem to involve the 5-HT2C receptor. There is a genetic polymorphism of the
promoter region of this receptor, and patients with a variant allele have less
weight gain. Drugs with a strong 5-HT2C affinity would be expected to have a
more significant impact on body weight of patients with a polymorphism of
the 5-HT2C receptor promoter region.
Weight Loss. Initial weight loss is associated with SSRI treatment but is
usually transient, with most weight being regained within the first few
months. Bupropion (Wellbutrin) has been shown to cause modest weight loss
that is sustained. When combined with diet and lifestyle changes, bupropion
can facilitate more significant weight loss. Topiramate (Topamax) and
zonisamide (Zonegran), marketed as treatments for epilepsy, sometimes
produce substantial, sustained loss of weight.
Glucose Changes. Increased risk of glucose abnormalities, including
diabetes mellitus, is associated with weight increase during psychotropic drug
therapy. Clozapine and olanzapine are associated with a greater risk than
other SDAs of abnormalities in fasting glucose levels, as well as
hyperosmolar diabetes and ketoacidosis. This dysregulation of glucose
homeostasis appears to be drug-induced and increases glucagon.
Hyponatremia. Hyponatremia is associated with oxcarbazepine (Trileptal)
and SSRI treatment, especially in elderly patients. Confusion, agitation, and
lethargy are common symptoms.




<<<PAGE 1927>>>

now more commonly used than the “typical” antipsychotics. In contrast to the
earlier antipsychotic drugs, the SGAs have significant effects on both the
dopamine and serotonin systems. Their pharmacology is complex, with
individual drugs in this group having multiple neurotransmitter effects. All
SGAs are indicated for the treatment of schizophrenia. Most of these SGA
drugs have also received approval as monotherapy or adjunctive therapy in
the treatment of bipolar disorder. Some have also been approved as adjuncts
for the treatment of major depression.
As of 2020, 13 SGA drugs were approved by the FDA. These include the
following:
Aripiprazole (marketed as Abilify)
Asenapine Maleate (marketed as Saphris)
Brexpiprazole (marketed as Rexulti)
Cariprazine (marketed as Vraylar)
Clozapine (marketed as Clozaril)
Iloperidone (marketed as Fanapt)
Lumateperone (marketed as Caplyta)
Lurasidone (marketed as Latuda)
Olanzapine (marketed as Zyprexa, and as Symbyax in combination with
fluoxetine)
Paliperidone (marketed as Invega)
Quetiapine (marketed as Seroquel)
Risperidone (marketed as Risperdal)
Ziprasidone (marketed as Geodon)
It is arguable whether the SGAs represent an improvement in overall
tolerability than the DRAs. Although there is an improvement concerning a
lowered, not absent, risk of EPS, most of the drugs in this group often
produce substantial weight gain, which in turn increases the potential for the
development of diabetes mellitus. Olanzapine and clozapine appear to
account for most cases of weight gain and drug-induced diabetes mellitus.
The other agents pose a smaller risk of these side effects; nevertheless, the
FDA has requested that all SGAs carry a warning label that patients taking
the drugs need to be monitored closely, and has recommended the following
factors be considered for all patients prescribed SGAs:




<<<PAGE 1929>>>

risk (1.6 to 1.7 times) of death compared with placebo. All of these agents are
considered first-line drugs for schizophrenia except clozapine, which may
cause adverse hematologic effects that require weekly blood sampling.
Schizophrenia and Schizoaffective Disorder. The SDAs are useful for
treating acute and chronic psychoses such as schizophrenia and
schizoaffective disorder, in both adults and adolescents. SDAs are as good as
or better than typical antipsychotics (DRAs) for the treatment of positive
symptoms in schizophrenia and superior to DRAs for the treatment of
negative symptoms. Compared with persons treated with DRAs, persons
treated with SDAs have fewer relapses and require less frequent
hospitalization, fewer emergency department visits, less phone contact with
mental health professionals, and less treatment in day programs.
Because clozapine has potentially life-threatening adverse effects, it is
appropriate only for patients with schizophrenia who are resistant to all other
antipsychotics. Other indications for clozapine include treatment of persons
with severe tardive dyskinesia—which can be reversed with high dosages in
some cases—and those with a low threshold for EPS. Persons who tolerate
clozapine have done well on long-term therapy. The effectiveness of
clozapine may be increased by augmentation with risperidone, which raises
clozapine concentrations and sometimes results in dramatic clinical
improvement.
Mood Disorders. Most of the SDAs (clozapine being a notable exception)
are FDA approved for the treatment of acute mania. Some of these agents,
including aripiprazole, olanzapine, quetiapine, and quetiapine XR, are also
approved for the maintenance treatment in bipolar disorder as monotherapy
or adjunctive therapy. The SDAs improve depressive symptoms in
schizophrenia, and both clinical experience and clinical trials show that all of
the SDAs augment antidepressants in the acute management of major
depression. At this time, olanzapine, in combination with fluoxetine, has been
approved for treatment-resistant depression, and aripiprazole and quetiapine
XR are indicated for adjunctive therapy to antidepressants in MDDs.
Quetiapine and quetiapine XR are also approved in bipolar depression. A
fixed combination of olanzapine and fluoxetine (Symbyax) is approved as a
treatment for acute bipolar depression.




<<<PAGE 1933>>>

Dosage. Paliperidone is available in 3-, 6-, and 9-mg tablets. The
recommended dosage is 6 mg once daily administered in the morning. It can
be taken with or without food. It is also available as extended-release tablets,
which are also available in 3-, 6-, and 9-mg tablets administered once daily. It
is recommended that no more than 12 mg should be administered per day. A
long-acting formulation of paliperidone (Invega Sustenna) is given by
injection once a month. Invega Sustenna is available as a white to off-white
sterile aqueous extended-release suspension for intramuscular injection in
dose strengths of 39-, 78-, 117-, 156-, and 234-mg paliperidone palmitate.
The drug product hydrolyzes to the active moiety, paliperidone, resulting in
dose strengths of 25, 50, 75, 100, and 150 mg of paliperidone, respectively.
Invega Sustenna is provided in a prefilled syringe with a plunger stopper
and tip cap. The kit also contains two safety needles (a 1½-in 22-gauge safety
needle and a 1-in 23-gauge safety needle). It has a half-life of 25 to 49 days.
Monthly injections of 117 mg are recommended, although higher or lower
dosages can be used depending on the clinical situation. The first two
injections should be in the deltoid muscle because plasma concentrations are
28 percent higher with deltoid versus gluteal administration. Subsequent
injections can alternate between gluteal and deltoid sites.
Side Effects. The dose of paliperidone should be reduced in patients with
renal impairment. It may cause more sensitivity to temperature extremes,
such as very hot or cold conditions. Paliperidone may cause an increase in
QT (QTc) interval and should be avoided in combination with other drugs
that cause prolongation of QT interval. It may cause orthostatic hypotension,
tachycardia, somnolence, akathisia, dystonia, EPS, and parkinsonism.
Olanzapine (Zyprexa)
Indications. Olanzapine is indicated for the treatment of schizophrenia.
Oral olanzapine is indicated for use as monotherapy for the acute treatment of
manic or mixed episodes associated with bipolar I disorder and maintenance
treatment of bipolar I disorder. Oral olanzapine is also indicated for the
treatment of manic or mixed episodes associated with bipolar I disorder as an
adjunct to lithium or valproate, and olanzapine can also be used in
combination with fluoxetine (Symbyax) for the treatment of depressive




<<<PAGE 1934>>>

episodes associated with bipolar I disorder.
Oral olanzapine and fluoxetine in combination (Symbyax) is indicated for
the treatment of treatment-resistant depression. Olanzapine monotherapy is
not indicated for the treatment of treatment-resistant depression.
Pharmacology. Approximately 85 percent of olanzapine is absorbed from
the GI tract, and about 40 percent of the dosage is inactivated by first-pass
hepatic metabolism. Peak concentrations are reached in 5 hours, and the halflife averages 31 hours (range 21 to 54 hours). It is given in once-daily dosing.
In addition to 5-HT2A and D2 antagonism, olanzapine is an antagonist of the
D1, D4, α1, 5-HT1A, muscarinic M1 to M5, and H1 receptors.
Dosages. Olanzapine is available in 2.5-, 5-, 7.5-, 10-, 15-, and 20-mg oral
and Zydis form (orally disintegrating) tablets. The initial dosage for the
treatment of psychosis is usually 5 or 10 mg. For acute mania, it is usually 10
or 15 mg given once daily. It is also available as 5-, 10-, 15-, and 20-mg
orally disintegrating tablets that might be useful for patients who have
difficulty swallowing pills or who “cheek” their medication.
A starting daily dose of 5 to 10 mg is recommended. After 1 week, the
dosage can be raised to 10 mg a day. Given the long half-life, 1 week must be
allowed to achieve each new steady-state blood level. Dosages in clinical use
ranges vary, with 5 to 20 mg a day is most commonly used, but 30 to 40 mg a
day is needed in treatment-resistant patients. A word of caution, however, is
that the higher dosages are associated with increased EPS and other adverse
effects, and dosages above 20 mg a day were not studied in the pivotal trials
that led to the approval of olanzapine. The parenteral form of olanzapine is
indicated for the treatment of acute agitation associated with schizophrenia
and bipolar disorder, and the IM dosage is 10 mg. Coadministration with
benzodiazepines is not approved.
Other Formulations. Olanzapine is available as an extended-release
injectable suspension (Relprevv), which is a long-acting atypical IM injection
indicated for the treatment of schizophrenia. It is injected deep in the gluteal
region and should not be administered intravenously or subcutaneously, nor
is it approved for deltoid administration. Before administering the injection,
the administrator should aspirate the syringe for several seconds to ensure




<<<PAGE 1935>>>

that no blood is visible. It carries a boxed warning for postinjection delirium
sedation syndrome (PDSS). Patients are at risk for severe sedation (including
coma) and must be observed for 3 hours after each injection in a registered
facility. In controlled studies, all patients with PDSS recovered, and there
were no deaths reported. It is postulated that PDSS is secondary to increased
levels of olanzapine secondary to accidental rupture of a blood vessel,
causing extreme sedation or delirium. Patients should be managed as
clinically appropriate and, if necessary, monitored in a facility capable of
resuscitation. The injection can be given every 2 or 4 weeks, depending on
the dosing guidelines.
Drug Interactions. Fluvoxamine (Luvox) and cimetidine (Tagamet)
increase, and carbamazepine and phenytoin decrease, serum concentrations of
olanzapine. Ethanol increases olanzapine absorption by more than 25 percent,
leading to increased sedation. Olanzapine has little effect on the metabolism
of other drugs.
Side Effects. Other than clozapine, olanzapine consistently causes a more
significant amount and more frequent weight gain than other atypicals. This
effect is not dose-related and continues over time. Clinical trial data suggest it
peaks after 9 months, after which it may continue to increase more slowly.
Somnolence, dry mouth, dizziness, constipation, dyspepsia, increased
appetite, akathisia, and tremor are associated with olanzapine use. A small
number of patients (2 percent) may need to discontinue the use of the drug
because of transaminase elevation. There is a dose-related risk of EPS. The
manufacturer recommends a “periodic” assessment of blood sugar and
transaminases during treatment with olanzapine. There is an FDA-mandated
warning about an increased risk of stroke among patients with dementia
treated with SDAs, but this risk is small and is outweighed by improved
behavioral control that treatment may produce.
Quetiapine (Seroquel)
Indications. Quetiapine is indicated for the treatment of schizophrenia. It is
also indicated for the acute treatment of manic episodes associated with
bipolar I disorder, both as monotherapy and as an adjunct to lithium or




<<<PAGE 1949>>>

of blood glucose, lipids, and body weight is recommended.
Although the transition from a DRA to an SDA may be made abruptly, it is
wiser to taper off the DRA slowly while titrating up the SDA. Clozapine and
olanzapine both have anticholinergic effects, and the transition from one to
the other can usually be accomplished with little risk of cholinergic rebound.
The transition from risperidone to olanzapine is best accomplished by
tapering the risperidone off over 3 weeks while simultaneously beginning
olanzapine at 10 mg a day. Risperidone, quetiapine, and ziprasidone lack
anticholinergic effects, and the abrupt transition from a DRA, olanzapine, or
clozapine to one of these agents may cause cholinergic rebound, which
consists of excessive salivation, nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea. The risk of
cholinergic rebound can be mitigated by initially augmenting risperidone,
quetiapine, or ziprasidone with an anticholinergic drug, which is then tapered
off slowly. Any initiation and termination of SDA use should be
accomplished gradually.
It is wise to overlap the administration of the new drug with the old drug.
Of interest, some people have a more robust clinical response while taking
the two agents during the transition and then regressing on monotherapy with
the newer drug. We know little about the safety of combination antipsychotic
treatment.
Persons receiving regular injections of depot formulations of a DRA who
are to switch to SDA use are given the first dose of the SDA on the day the
next injection is due.
Persons who developed agranulocytosis while taking clozapine can safely
switch to olanzapine use, although initiation of olanzapine use amid
clozapine-induced agranulocytosis can prolong the time of recovery from the
usual 3 to 4 days up to 11 to 12 days. It is prudent to wait for the resolution of
agranulocytosis before initiating olanzapine use. Emergence or recurrence of
agranulocytosis has not been reported with olanzapine, even in persons who
developed it while taking clozapine.
SDA use by pregnant women has not been studied, but consideration
should be given to the potential of risperidone to raise prolactin
concentrations, sometimes up to three to four times the upper limit of the
normal range. Because the drugs can be excreted in breast milk, they should
not be taken by nursing mothers. The dosages for selected SDAs are given in
Table 21-9.




<<<PAGE 1961>>>

paralytic ileus, although the relief is only transitory. Bethanechol
(Urecholine) (20 to 40 mg a day) may be useful in some persons with urinary
retention.
Weight gain is associated with increased mortality and morbidity and with
medication noncompliance. Low-potency DRAs may cause significant
weight gain but not as much as is seen with the SDAs olanzapine (Zyprexa)
and clozapine (Clozaril). Molindone and perhaps loxapine (Loxitane) appear
to be least likely to cause weight gain.
Endocrine Effects. Blockade of the dopamine receptors in the
tuberoinfundibular tract results in the increased secretion of prolactin, which
can result in breast enlargement, galactorrhea, amenorrhea, and inhibited
orgasm in women and impotence in men. The SDAs, except risperidone
(Risperdal), are not significantly associated with an increase in prolactin
levels and may be the drugs of choice for persons experiencing disturbing
side effects from increased prolactin release.
Sexual Adverse Effects. Both men and women taking DRAs can
experience anorgasmia and decreased libido. Up to 50 percent of men who
take antipsychotics report ejaculatory and erectile disturbances. Sildenafil
(Viagra), vardenafil (Levitra), and tadalafil (Cialis) are often used to treat
psychotropic-induced orgasmic dysfunction, but they have not been studied
in combination with the DRAs. Thioridazine is mainly associated with
decreased libido and retrograde ejaculation in men. Priapism and reports of
painful orgasms have also been described, both possibly resulting from α1adrenergic antagonist activity.
Skin and Eye Effects. Allergic dermatitis and photosensitivity may occur,
especially with low-potency agents. Urticarial, maculopapular, petechial, and
edematous eruptions may occur early in treatment, generally in the first few
weeks, and remit spontaneously. A photosensitivity reaction that resembles a
severe sunburn also occurs in some persons taking chlorpromazine. Persons
should be warned of this adverse effect, should spend no more than 30 to 60
minutes in the sun, and should use sunscreens. Long-term chlorpromazine
use is associated with blue-gray discoloration of skin areas exposed to
sunlight. The skin changes often begin with a tan or golden brown color and




<<<PAGE 2190>>>

Therapeutic Indications
There is considerably more experience in clinical psychiatry with clonidine
than with guanfacine. There is recent interest in the use of guanfacine for the
same indications that respond to clonidine due to guanfacine’s longer halflife and relative lack of sedative effects.
Withdrawal from Opioids, Alcohol, Benzodiazepines, or Nicotine.
Clonidine and guanfacine are effective in reducing the autonomic symptoms
of rapid opioid withdrawal (e.g., hypertension, tachycardia, dilated pupils,
sweating, lacrimation, and rhinorrhea) but not the associated subjective
sensations. Clonidine administration (0.1 to 0.2 mg two to four times a day)
is initiated before detoxification and is then tapered off over 1 to 2 weeks
(Table 21-55).
Clonidine and guanfacine can reduce symptoms of alcohol and
benzodiazepine withdrawal, including anxiety, diarrhea, and tachycardia.
They can reduce craving, anxiety, and irritability symptoms of nicotine
withdrawal. The transdermal patch formulation of clonidine is associated
with better long-term compliance for purposes of detoxification than is the
tablet formulation.
Tourette Disorder. Clonidine and guanfacine are effective drugs for the
treatment of Tourette disorder. Most clinicians begin treatment for Tourette
disorder with the standard DRAs haloperidol (Haldol) and pimozide (Orap)
and the SDAs risperidone (Risperdal) and olanzapine (Zyprexa). However, if
concerned about the adverse effects of these drugs, the clinician may begin
treatment with clonidine or guanfacine. The starting dose of clonidine for
children is 0.05 mg a day; it can be increased to 0.3 mg a day in divided
doses. Clonidine may take long periods (e.g., 4 to 6 months) to positively
effect the symptoms of the disorder. The response rate has been reported to
be up to 70 percent.
Table 21-54
α2-Adrenergic Receptor Agonists Used in Psychiatrya




<<<PAGE 2236>>>

human pregnancy may expose the fetus to significant risk.
The most common side effects include drowsiness, loss of appetite,
dizziness, headache, nausea, and agitation or irritability. Zonisamide has also
been associated with hypohidrosis. There is a 2 to 4 percent risk of kidney
stones. Other drugs known to provoke stones, such as topiramate or
acetazolamide (Diamox), should not be combined with zonisamide. Severe,
but rare, adverse drug reactions include Stevens–Johnson syndrome, toxic
epidermal necrolysis, and metabolic acidosis.
Typical dosing for weight loss has not been established. Generally,
zonisamide is started at 100 mg at night for 2 weeks, and increased by 100
mg daily every 2 weeks to a target dose of 200 to 600 mg/day in one or two
daily doses.
Metformin (Glucophage). Metformin is a medication for type 2 diabetes
mellitus. Its actions include reduction of hepatic glucose production, reduced
intestinal glucose absorption, increased insulin sensitivity, and improved
peripheral glucose uptake and regulation. It does not increase insulin
secretion.
When used as an adjunct to SGAs, it has consistently been shown to
reduce body weight and waist circumference. Metformin probably has the
best evidence of therapeutic benefit for the treatment of antipsychotic druginduced metabolic syndrome. In several studies, metformin has been shown
to attenuate or reverse some of the weight gain induced by antipsychotics.
The degree of effect on body weight compares favorably with the effect of
other treatment options that are approved for weight reduction. The weight
loss effect of adjunctive metformin appears to be stronger in drug-naive
patients treated with SGA medications. This effect is most evident for those
being treated with clozapine (Clozaril) and olanzapine (Zyprexa). Based on
the existing evidence, if weight gain occurs after SGA initiation, despite
lifestyle intervention, metformin should be considered.
Common side effects include nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, and loss
of appetite. GI side effects can be mitigated by dividing the dose, taking the
drug after meals, or using delayed-release formulations.
One serious treatment risk is that of lactic acidosis. This side effect is more
common in those with reduced renal function than other patients. Although
very rare (approximately 9 in 100,000 persons/yr), it has a 50 percent




<<<PAGE 2252>>>

with schizophrenia. Schizophr Bull. 2008;34(1):60–71.
Leucht S, Cores C, Arbter D, Engel R, Li C, Davis J. Second-generation
versus first-generation antipsychotic drugs for schizophrenia: a metaanalysis. Lancet. 2009;373:31–41.
Leucht S, Komossa K, Rummel-Kluge C, Corves C, Hunger H, Schmid F,
Lobos CA, Schwartz S, Davis JM. A meta-analysis of head-to-head
comparisons of secondgeneration antipsychotics in the treatment of schizophrenia. Am J
Psychiatry. 2009;
166(2):152–163.
Leucht S, Pitschel-Walz G, Abraham D, Kissling W. Efficacy and
extrapyramidal side-effects of the new antipsychotics olanzapine,
quetiapine, risperidone, and sertindole compared to conventional
antipsychotics and placebo. A meta-analysis of randomized controlled
trials. Schizophr Res. 1999;35(1):51–68.
Lieberman JA, Stroup TS, McEvoy JP, Swartz MS, Rosenheck RA. Clinical
Antipsychotic Trials of Intervention Effectiveness (CATIE) investigators.
N Engl J Med. 2005;353:1209.
Mamo D, Graff A, Mizrahi R, Shammi CM, Romeyer F. Differential effects
of aripiprazole on D(2), 5-HT(2), and 5-HT(1A) receptor occupancy in
patients with schizophrenia: a triple tracer PET study. Am J Psychiatry.
2007;164(9):1411–1417.
Marder SR, Essock SM, Miller AL, Buchanan RW, Davis JM. The Mount
Sinai conference on the pharmacotherapy of schizophrenia. Schizophr Bull.
2002;28(1):5.
Marder SR, Hurford IM, van Kammen DP. Second-generation
antipsychotics. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan &
Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Vol. 2.
Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:3206.
McEvoy JP, Lieberman JA, Perkins DO, Hamer RM, Gu H. Efficacy and
tolerability of olanzapine, quetiapine, and risperidone in the treatment of
early psychosis: a randomized, double-blind 52-week comparison. Am J
Psychiatry. 2007;164(7):
1050–1060.
McEvoy JP, Lieberman JA, Stroup TS. Effectiveness of clozapine versus
olanzapine, quetiapine, and risperidone in patients with chronic




<<<PAGE 3137>>>

Benzodiazepines Increased beta activity
Clozapine
(Clozaril)

Nonspecific change

Olanzapine
(Zyprexa)

Nonspecific change

Risperidone
(Risperdal)

Nonspecific change

Quetiapine
(Seroquel)

No significant changes

Aripiprazole
(Abilify)

No significant changes

Lithium

Slowing or paroxysmal activity

Alcohol

Decreased alpha activity; increased theta activity

Opioids

Decreased alpha activity; increased voltage of
theta and delta waves; in overdose, slow waves

Barbiturates

Increased beta activity; in withdrawal states,
generalized paroxysmal activity and spike
discharges

Marijuana

Increased alpha activity in frontal area of brain;
overall slow alpha activity

Cocaine

Similar to marijuana

Inhalants

Diffuse slowing of delta and theta waves

Nicotine

Increased alpha activity; in withdrawal, marked
decrease in alpha activity

Caffeine

In withdrawal, increase in amplitude or voltage of
theta activity

Topographic Quantitative Electroencephalography (QEEG)




<<<PAGE 3523>>>

Clozapine, risperidone,
and olanzapine in the
treatment of
schizophrenia

United States,
Canada,
Europe,
England,
South
America,
South Africa

Kane J, Honigfield G, Singer J, Melt
Clozaril Collaborative Study Gro
treatment-resistant schizophreni
comparison with chlorpromazine
Psychiatry. 1988;45:789; Kane J
Clozapine benefits and risks.
1994;20:23; Ayd FJ Jr. Risperido
unique antipsychotic. Int Drug Th
1994;29:5; Marder SR, Meibach
the treatment of schizophrenia.
1994;151:825; Kane J. Risperido
Psychiatry. 1994;151:802; Beasl
Tran P, Satterlee W, Sanger T. O
placebo and haloperidol acute ph
North American double-blind ola
Neuropsychopharmacology
G, Kuntz A. Review of recent clin
olanzapine. Br J Psychiatry
Czobor P, Sheitman B, Lindenm
Clozapine, olanzapine, risperido
in the treatment of patients with c
schizophrenia and schizoaffectiv


