<<<PAGE 439>>>

Nonstimulant Medications. Atomoxetine HCl is a norepinephrine uptake
inhibitor approved by the FDA for the treatment of ADHD in children age 6
years and older. The mechanism of action is not well understood, but likely
involves selective inhibition of the presynaptic norepinephrine transporter.
Atomoxetine absorbs well in the gastrointestinal tract, and it reaches maximal
plasma levels in 1 to 2 hours after ingestion. It is useful for inattention as well
as impulsivity in children and adults with ADHD. Its half-life is
approximately 5 hours and is given twice daily in most cases. The most
common side effects include diminished appetite, abdominal discomfort,
dizziness, and irritability. In some cases, there were increases in blood
pressure and heart rate. Atomoxetine is metabolized by the cytochrome P450
(CYP) 2D6 hepatic enzyme system. A small fraction of the population are
poor metabolizers of CYP 2D6–metabolized drugs, and, for those
individuals, plasma concentrations of the drug may increase as much as
fivefold for a given dose of medication. Drugs that inhibit CYP 2D6,
including fluoxetine, paroxetine, and quinidine, may lead to increased plasma
levels of this medication. Despite its short half-life, research suggests that
atomoxetine can reduce symptoms of ADHD in children during the school
day when administered once daily. Another recent study of a combination of
atomoxetine alone and combined with fluoxetine in the treatment of 127
children with ADHD and symptoms of anxiety or depression suggested that
atomoxetine alone can lead to improvements in mood and anxiety. Children
who received combined atomoxetine and fluoxetine experienced more
significant increases in blood pressure and pulse than those taking
atomoxetine only.
α-Agonists, both short-acting and the extended-release forms of clonidine
hydrochloride and guanfacine, are FDA approved for the treatment of ADHD
in children and adolescents from 6 to 7 years of age. Clonidine, a centrally
acting α2-adrenergic receptor agonist, likely exerts its effect on the prefrontal
cortex, although the mechanism of action is unknown. It is available in 0.1mg and 0.2-mg tablets, and is generally used twice daily, once in the morning
and once at night, to provide an around-the-clock effect. Clonidine is initiated
at 0.1 mg at bedtime, with incremental weekly increases of 0.1 mg. The
maximum dose recommended is 0.2 mg twice daily. The extended-release
formulation is not interchangeable with the short-acting clonidine. Because it




<<<PAGE 564>>>

Psychiatric Hospitalization
We should assess for suicidal thoughts, behaviors, and a history of suicidal
behavior in every child or adolescent with major depression. Safety is the
most immediate consideration in assessing depression in youth, that is, a
determination as to whether immediate psychiatric hospitalization is
necessary. Depressed children and adolescents who express suicidal thoughts
or behaviors most often require some extended evaluation in the safety of the
psychiatric hospital to provide maximal protection from self-destructive
impulses and behaviors.
Evidence-Based Treatment Studies
The Treatment for Adolescents with Depression Study (TADS) divided 439
adolescents between 12 and 17 years of age into three treatment groups of 12
weeks, composed of either fluoxetine alone (10 to 40 mg/day), fluoxetine
with the same dose range in combination with CBT, or CBT alone. Based on
ratings of the Children’s Depression Rating Scale-Revised (CDRS-R),
combination treatment had significantly superior response rates compared
with either treatment alone. Based on CGI scores at 12 weeks, rates of much
or very much improved were 71 percent for the combined treatment group,
60.6 percent for the fluoxetine group, 43.2 percent for the CBT alone group,
and 34.4 percent for the placebo group. At 12 weeks, combination treatment
was the optimal strategy in the treatment of adolescent depression. By the end
of 9 months of treatment, however, response rates for each group had
converged, so that response for the combination group was 86 percent,
fluoxetine group response was about 81 percent, and CBT-alone group
response rate was 81 percent. The long-term effectiveness of treatments for
adolescent depression demonstrates that for moderately ill adolescents,
fluoxetine, CBT, or the combination is efficacious. However, the addition of
CBT to fluoxetine decreased persistent suicidal ideation and potential
treatment-related emergence of suicidal ideation.
A second large multicenter randomized placebo-controlled trial, Treatment
of SSRI-Resistant Depression in Adolescents (TORDIA), included
adolescents with major depression who had not responded to a 2-month trial
with an SSRI antidepressant. The investigators in this study randomly
assigned 334 adolescents between 12 and 18 years of age to a different SSRI




<<<PAGE 567>>>

depression severity pretreatment and posttreatment using parent ratings on
the Preschool Reelings Checklist-Scale Version (PFC-S), a 20-item checklist.
Results revealed that both groups showed significant improvement, with
particular improvement in the PCIT-ED group concerning emotion
recognition, child executive functioning, and parenting stress. This pilot
study indicates that PCIT-ED is a promising novel intervention for preschool
depression that deserves further investigation.
Pharmacotherapy
Fluoxetine and escitalopram have FDA approval in the treatment of major
depression in adolescents. Three RCTs of fluoxetine in depressed children
and adolescents demonstrate its efficacy. The common side effects are similar
as for adults: headache, gastrointestinal symptoms, sedation, and insomnia.
Short-term randomized clinical trials have demonstrated the efficacy of
citalopram and sertraline compared with placebo in the treatment of major
depression in children and adolescents. Sertraline was efficacious in two
multicenter, double-blind, placebo-controlled trials of 376 children and
adolescents. The doses of sertraline ranged from 50 to 200 mg a day or
placebo. Nearly 70 percent of the subjects had a greater than 40 percent
decrease in depression rating scale scores (compared with 56 percent in the
placebo group). The most common side effects are anorexia, vomiting,
diarrhea, and agitation.
Citalopram has been demonstrated in one RCT in the United States to be
efficacious in 174 children and adolescents treated with citalopram at doses
of 20 to 40 mg a day or placebo for 8 weeks. Significantly more of the group
on citalopram showed improvement compared with placebo on the
depression rating scale (CDRS-R). A significantly increased response rate
(response defined as less than 28 on CDRS-R) of 35 percent occurred in the
citalopram group, compared with 24 percent of the placebo group. Common
side effects that emerged included headache, nausea, insomnia, rhinitis,
abdominal pain, dizziness, fatigue, and flu-like symptoms.
RCTs to date that have not shown efficacy on primary outcome measures
include those using mirtazapine and tricyclic antidepressants. A metaanalysis of SSRI trials in depressed children and adolescents found the
efficacy of SSRIs compared to placebo with an average response rate of 60




<<<PAGE 627>>>

She reports that she is embarrassed to go shopping or to the movies with
her sisters because they often run into neighborhood peers along the way
and stop to chat, and this makes her feel “stupid,” because even though
she is the oldest, she does not say anything and believes that her sisters’
friends will laugh at her shyness. Recently, one of her former best friends
confronted her about why she had stopped “hanging out” with her
friends. Kate had stopped eating lunch with her friends in school because
she felt humiliated when they would talk about their weekend plans, and
even when they invited her to join, she would just look the other way and
ignore the conversation. Kate had become isolated, even in school, and
admitted to her sister that she was lonely. Kate was brought for an
evaluation after her younger sister commented to her mother that Kate
spent all of her time alone whenever her sisters saw their friends and that
she looked sad and stressed out whenever she was around peers. Kate
was down, always in poor spirits, and had stopped interacting with her
sisters. On rare occasions, Kate’s younger sister had invited Kate to
parties or friend’s homes, but Kate had declined and burst into tears.
Kate was evaluated by a child psychiatrist who made the diagnoses of
social anxiety disorder, generalized anxiety disorder, and major
depression and recommended a combination of treatment options,
including cognitive-behavioral therapy and a trial of fluoxetine. Kate and
her family decided to try the medication first. Kate started 10 mg of
fluoxetine, and over the next month was titrated to a dose of 20 mg. By
the third week of the medication trial, Kate was noticeably less resistant
to going out with her sisters to places where they were likely to encounter
peers. Her sisters noticed that she did not seem as stressed and started to
sit with peers at lunch in the school cafeteria occasionally. She stated that
she did not feel as self-conscious as she used to in class and was willing
to go to a friend’s house. She still declined to go to a birthday party of a
peer that she did not know very well. Kate continued on the same
medication, and within 2 months, she was significantly less anxious in
social situations. She occasionally complained of a stomachache but
tolerated the medication well. Her family was impressed when she
requested they plan a birthday party for her 16th birthday and decided to
invite 10 friends.




<<<PAGE 644>>>

have academic difficulties or even failure due to a lack of participation.
Children with selective mutism are typically shy, anxious, and at increased
risk for a depressive disorder. Many children with early-onset selective
mutism remit with or without treatment. Recent data suggest that fluoxetine
may influence the course of selective mutism, and treatment enhances
recovery. Children in whom the disorder persists often have difficulty
forming social relationships. Teasing and scapegoating by peers may cause
them to refuse to go to school. Some children with any form of severe social
anxiety are rigid, compulsive, negativistic, and prone to temper tantrums and
oppositional and aggressive behavior at home. Other children with the
disorder tolerate the feared situation by communicating with gestures, such as
nodding, shaking the head, and saying “Uh-huh” or “No.” In one follow-up
study, about one-half of children with selective mutism improved within 5 to
10 years. Children who do not improve by age 10 years appear to have a
long-term course and a worse prognosis. As many as one-third of children
with selective mutism, with or without treatment, may develop other
psychiatric disorders, particularly other anxiety disorders and depression.

TREATMENT
The optimal treatment is a multimodal approach using psychoeducation for
the family, CBT, and SSRIs as needed. Preschool children may also benefit
from a therapeutic nursery. For school-age children, individual CBT is the
first-line treatment. Family education and cooperation are beneficial.
Published data on the successful treatment of children with selective mutism
is scant. However, reasonable evidence indicates that children with social
anxiety disorder respond to various SSRIs, and, currently, CBT treatments
have also demonstrated efficacy in children with anxiety disorders.
A recent report of 21 children with selective mutism treated in an open trial
with fluoxetine suggested that this medication may be useful for childhood
selective mutism. Reports have confirmed the efficacy of fluoxetine in the
treatment of adult social anxiety disorder and at least one double-blind,
placebo-controlled study using fluoxetine with children with mutism. A large
NIMH-funded study of anxiety disorders in children and adolescents called
Research Units in Pediatric Psychopharmacology (RUPP), has shown distinct
superiority of fluvoxamine over placebo in the treatment of a variety of




<<<PAGE 653>>>

intervention in the treatment of OCD in youth increases the response rates. A
controlled comparison of family CBT and psychoeducation and relaxation
(PRT) in 71 families of children with OCD showed that clinical remission
rates in the FCBT group were significantly higher than those in the PRT
group. The FCBT treatment reduced parent involvement and accommodation
in their affected child’s symptoms, which led to decreased symptomatology.
A randomized controlled study investigating web-camera delivered FCBT
(W-CBT) compared to a waitlist condition assigned 31 families to one of the
above conditions. Assessments were conducted immediately before and after
treatment and at a 3-month follow-up for the W-CBT group. The W-CBT
group was superior to the waitlist control group on all primary outcome
measures, with large effect sizes. Eighty-one percent of the W-CBT group
responded, compared to 13 percent of the waitlist group. The children
maintained the gains at the 3-month follow-up assessment. The authors
conclude that W-CBT may be efficacious in the treatment of OCD in youth
and may be a promising tool for future dissemination.
Exposure and response prevention (ERP) was studied in a group format in
youth with OCD in a community-based program. Group-based ERP was
effective in reducing OCD symptom severity and depressive symptoms, but
not anxiety symptoms, in a naturalistic treatment setting for children with
OCD and comorbid anxiety or depressive features.
Multiple randomized clinical trials establish the efficacy of SSRIs for OCD
in youth. A meta-analysis of 13 studies of SSRIs, including sertraline,
fluvoxamine, fluoxetine, and paroxetine, has provided evidence of the
efficacy of SSRIs with a moderate effect size. A randomized controlled
clinical trial of citalopram versus fluoxetine in youth with OCD found that
citalopram was as safe and effective as fluoxetine for the treatment of OCD
in children and adolescents. There have been no apparent differences in the
rate of response for the individual SSRIs.
Currently, three SSRIs: sertraline (at least 6 years), fluoxetine (at least 7
years), and fluvoxamine (at least 8 years), as well as clomipramine (at least
10 years), have received FDA approval for the treatment of OCD in youth.
The black-box warning for antidepressants used in children for any disorder,
including OCD, is applicable so that close monitoring for suicidal ideation or
behavior is mandated when using these agents in children.
Typical side effects that emerge with the use of SSRIs include insomnia,




<<<PAGE 707>>>

contact with a psychiatric department—A nested case-control design using
Danish register data. J Child Psychol Psychiatry. 2011;52:102.
Correll CU, Kratocvil CJ, March J. Developments in pediatric
psychopharmacology: focus on stimulants, antidepressants and
antipsychotics. J Clin Psychiatry. 2011;72:655–670.
Field T. Prenatal depression effects on early development: a review. Infant
Behav Dev. 2011;34:1–14.
Frodl T, Reinhold E, Koutsoulieris N, Donohoe G, Bondy B, Reiser M,
Moller Hj, Meisenzahl EM. Childhood stress, serotonin transporter gene
and brain structures in major depression. Neuropsychopharmacology.
2010;35:1383–1390.
Gould MS, Greenberg T, Velting DM, Shaffer D. Youth suicide risk and
preventive interventions: a review of the past ten years. J Am Acad Child
Adolesc Psychiatry. 2003;42:386.
Hall WD. How have the SSRI antidepressants affected suicide risk? Lancet.
2006;367(9527):1959.
Harro J, Kiive E. Droplets of black bile? Development of vulnerability and
resilience to depression in young age. Psychoneuroendocrinology.
2011;36:380–392.
Heiligenstein JH, Hoog SL, Wagner KD, Findling RL, Galil N, Kaplan S,
Busner J, Nilsson ME, Brown EB, Jacobson JG. Fluoxetine 40–60 mg
versus fluoxetine 20 mg in the treatment of children and adolescents with a
less-than-complete response to nine-week treatment with fluoxetine 10–20
mg: a pilot study. J Child Adolesc Psychopharmacol. 2006;16(1–2):207.
Hughes CW, Emslie GJ, Crimson ML, Posner K, Birmaher B, Ryan N,
Jensen P, Curry J, Vitiello B, Lopez M, Shon SP, Piszka SR, Trivedi MH,
The Texas Consensus Conference Panel on Medication Treatment of
Childhood Major Depressive Disorder. Texas Children’s Medication
Algorithm Project: update from Texas Consensus Conference Panel on
medication treatment of childhood major depressive disorder. J Am Acad
Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2007;46:667–686.
Kaess M, Parzer P, Haffner J, Steen R, Roos J, Klett M, Brunner R, Resch F.
Explaining gender differences in non-fatal suicidal behavior among
adolescents: a population-based study. BMC Public Health. 2011;11:597–
603.
Luby J, Lenze S, Tillman R. A novel early intervention for preschool




<<<PAGE 1247>>>

Maintenance

6–24 mo Return to full
or
function and
longer
quality of life
Prevention of
recurrence

Continue
psychoeducation
Rehabilitate
Manage
comorbidities
Monitor for
recurrence

Modified from Lam RW, McIntosh D, Wang J, Enns MW, Kolivakis T, Michalak EE, Sareen J,
Song WY, Kennedy SH, MacQueen GM, Milev RV, Parikh SV, Ravindran AV; CANMAT
Depression Work Group. Canadian Network for Mood and Anxiety Treatments (CANMAT)
2016 clinical guidelines for the management of adults with major depressive disorder: section
1. Disease burden and principles of care. Can J Psychiatry. 2016;61(9):510–523.

Table 7-11
SSRI and SNRI Antidepressant Medications and Their Side
Effect Profiles
Side Effect Frequency
Drug Class

Recommended 10–30%
Dose Range
(mg)

>30%

SSRI
Citalopram

20–40

Nausea, dry mouth, None
sweating

Escitalopram

10–20

Male sexual
dysfunction and
nausea

Fluoxetine

20–60

Nausea, dry mouth, None
somnolence,
nervousness,
anxiety,
insomnia,
tremor, anorexia

Fluvoxamine

100–300

Dry mouth,

None

Nausea




<<<PAGE 1522>>>

Treatment of Bulimia Nervosa
Most patients with uncomplicated bulimia nervosa do not require
hospitalization. In general, patients with bulimia nervosa are not as secretive
about their symptoms as patients with anorexia nervosa. Therefore, outpatient
treatment is usually not difficult, but psychotherapy is frequently stormy and
prolonged. In some cases—when eating binges are out of control, outpatient
treatment does not work, or a patient exhibits such additional psychiatric
symptoms as suicidality and substance abuse—hospitalization may become
necessary. Also, electrolyte and metabolic disturbances resulting from severe
purging may necessitate hospitalization.
Psychotherapy
COGNITIVE-BEHAVIORAL THERAPY. CBT should be considered the benchmark,

first-line treatment for bulimia nervosa. The data supporting the efficacy of
CBT are based on strict adherence to rigorously implemented, highly
detailed, manual-guided treatments that include about 18 to 20 sessions over
5 to 6 months. CBT implements several cognitive and behavioral procedures
to (1) interrupt the self-maintaining behavioral cycle of binging and dieting
and (2) alter the individual’s dysfunctional cognitions; beliefs about food,
weight, body image; and overall self-concept.
OTHER MODALITIES. Given its effectiveness in anorexia nervosa, clinicians

have also used FBT for bulimia nervosa. Additionally, controlled trials have
shown that a variety of novel ways of administering and facilitating CBT are
effective for bulimia nervosa. These include “stepped-care” programs and
internet-based platforms, computer-facilitated programs, email-enhanced
programs, and administration of CBT via telemedicine to remote areas.
Finally, emerging evidence suggests that dialectical behavior therapy may be
effective.
Pharmacotherapy. Antidepressant medications help treat bulimia nervosa,
particularly the SSRI fluoxetine. Fluoxetine can reduce binge eating and
purging, independent of the presence of a mood disorder. Dosages of
fluoxetine that are effective in decreasing binge eating, however, may be
higher (60 to 80 mg a day) than those used for depressive disorders. Other




<<<PAGE 1718>>>

Self-help groups based on the 12-step concept used in Alcoholics
Anonymous (AA) have been used successfully with many sex addicts. They
include such groups as Sexaholics Anonymous (SA), Sex and Love Addicts
Anonymous (SLAA), and Sex Addicts Anonymous (SAA). The groups differ
in that some are for men or women, or married persons or couples. All
advocate some abstinence from either the addictive behavior or sex in
general. Should a substance use disorder also be present, the patient often
requires referral to AA or Narcotics Anonymous (NA) as well. Patients may
enter an inpatient treatment unit when they lack sufficient motivation to
control their behavior on an outpatient basis or pose a danger to themselves
or others. Also, severe medical or psychiatric symptoms may require careful
supervision and treatment best carried out in a hospital.
A 42-year-old married businessman with two children was considered a
model of virtue in his community. He was active in his church and on the
boards of several charitable organizations. He was living a secret life,
however, and would lie to his wife, telling her that he was at a board
meeting when he was visiting massage parlors for paid sex. He eventually
was engaging in the behavior four to five times a day, and although he
tried to quit many times, he was unable to do so. He knew that he was
harming himself by putting his reputation and marriage at risk.
The patient presented himself to the psychiatric emergency room,
stating that he would prefer to be dead rather than continue the behavior
described. He was admitted with a diagnosis of major depressive disorder
and started on a daily dose of 20 mg of fluoxetine. He also received 100
mg of medroxyprogesterone intramuscularly once a day. His need to
masturbate diminished markedly and ceased entirely on the third hospital
day, as did his mental preoccupation with sex. His clinicians discontinued
the medroxyprogesterone on the sixth day and discharged him. He
continued to take fluoxetine, enrolled in a local SA group, and entered
individual and couples psychotherapy. His addictive behavior eventually
stopped, he was having satisfactory sexual relations with his wife, and he
was no longer suicidal or depressed.
Pharmacotherapy. Certain medications may be of use in treating sex




<<<PAGE 1974>>>

21.2 Antidepressants
SELECTIVE SEROTONIN REUPTAKE INHIBITORS
Fluoxetine (Prozac), the first SSRI marketed in the United States, rapidly
captured the favor of both clinicians and the general public as reports
emerged of dramatic patient responses to treatment of depression. Patients no
longer experienced such side effects as dry mouth, constipation, sedation,
orthostatic hypotension, and tachycardia, typical side effects associated with
the earlier antidepressant drugs—the TCAs and MAOIs. It was also
significantly safer when taken in overdose than any previously available
antidepressant. A significant effect of fluoxetine’s popularity was that it
helped ameliorate the long-standing stigma of depression and its treatment.
Table 21-15
Currently Approved Indications of the Selective Serotonin
Reuptake Inhibitors in the United States for Adult and
Pediatric Populations

Other SSRIs followed fluoxetine. These include sertraline (Zoloft),
paroxetine (Paxil), fluvoxamine (Luvox), citalopram (Celexa), escitalopram
(Lexapro), and vilazodone (Viibryd). These drugs are all equally effective in




<<<PAGE 1976>>>

metabolism of the coadministered medication. Each of the SSRIs possesses a
potential for slowing or blocking the metabolism of many drugs (Table 2116). Fluvoxamine is the most problematic of the drugs in this respect. It has a
marked effect on several of the CYP enzymes. Examples of clinically
significant interactions include fluvoxamine and theophylline (Slo-Bid, TheoDur) through CYP1A2 interaction, fluvoxamine and clozapine (Clozaril)
through CYP1A2 inhibition; and fluvoxamine with alprazolam (Xanax) or
clonazepam (Klonopin) through CYP3A4 inhibition. Fluoxetine and
paroxetine also possess significant effects on the CYP2D6 isozyme, which
may interfere with the efficacy of opiate analogs, such as codeine and
hydrocodone, by blocking the conversion of these agents to their active form.
Thus, coadministration of fluoxetine and paroxetine with an opiate interferes
with its analgesic effects. Sertraline, citalopram, and escitalopram are least
likely to complicate treatment because of interactions.
The pharmacokinetics of vilazodone (5 to 80 mg) is dose-proportional.
Steady-state plasma levels are achieved in about 3 days. The elimination of
vilazodone is primarily by hepatic metabolism with a terminal half-life of
approximately 25 hours.
Pharmacodynamics. The SSRIs are believed to exert their therapeutic
effects through serotonin reuptake inhibition. They derive their name because
they have little effect on the reuptake of norepinephrine or dopamine. Often,
adequate clinical activity and saturation of the 5-HT transporters are achieved
at starting dosages. As a rule, higher dosages do not increase antidepressant
efficacy but may increase the risk of adverse effects.
Table 21-16
CYP450 Inhibitory Potential of Commonly Prescribed
Antidepressants




<<<PAGE 1983>>>

POSTTRAUMATIC STRESS DISORDER. Pharmacotherapy for PTSD must target

specific symptoms in four clusters: reexperiencing, avoidance, negative
changes in mood and thinking, and arousal. For long-term treatment, SSRIs
appear to have a broader spectrum of therapeutic effects on specific PTSD
symptom clusters than do TCAs and MAOIs. Benzodiazepine augmentation
is useful in the acute symptomatic state. The SSRIs are associated with
marked improvement of both intrusive and avoidant symptoms.
GENERALIZED ANXIETY DISORDER. The SSRIs may be useful for the treatment

of specific phobias, generalized anxiety disorder (GAD), and separation
anxiety disorder. A thorough, individualized evaluation is the first approach,
with particular attention to identifying conditions amenable to drug therapy.
Also, cognitive-behavioral or other psychotherapies can be added for greater
efficacy.
Bulimia Nervosa and Other Eating Disorders. Fluoxetine is indicated
for the treatment of bulimia, which is best done in the context of
psychotherapy. Dosages of 60 mg a day are significantly more effective than
20 mg a day. In several well-controlled studies, fluoxetine in dosages of 60
mg a day was superior to placebo in reducing binge eating and induced
vomiting. Some experts recommend an initial course of cognitive-behavioral
therapy alone. If there is no response in 3 to 6 weeks, then fluoxetine
administration is added. The appropriate duration of treatment with fluoxetine
and psychotherapy has not been determined.
Fluvoxamine was not effective at a statistically significant level in one
double-blind, placebo-controlled trial for inpatients with bulimia.
Fluoxetine has been used in inpatient treatment of
anorexia nervosa to attempt to control comorbid mood disturbances and
obsessive-compulsive symptoms. However, at least two careful studies, one
of 7 months’ and one of 24 months’ duration, failed to find that fluoxetine
affected the overall outcome and the maintenance of weight. Effective
treatments for anorexia include cognitive-behavioral, interpersonal,
psychodynamic, and family therapies in addition to a trial with SSRIs.
ANOREXIA NERVOSA.

OBESITY.

Fluoxetine, in combination with a behavioral program, is only




<<<PAGE 1984>>>

modestly beneficial for weight loss. A significant percentage of all persons
who take SSRIs, including fluoxetine, lose weight initially but later may gain
weight. However, all SSRIs may cause initial weight gain.
PREMENSTRUAL DYSPHORIC DISORDER. PMDD is characterized by debilitating

mood and behavioral changes in the week preceding menstruation that
interferes with normal functioning. Sertraline, paroxetine, fluoxetine, and
fluvoxamine have been reported to reduce the symptoms of PMDD.
Controlled trials of fluoxetine and sertraline administered either throughout
the cycle or only during the luteal phase (the 2 weeks between ovulation and
menstruation) showed both schedules to be equally effective.
An additional observation of unclear significance was that fluoxetine was
associated with changing the duration of the menstrual period by more than 4
days, either lengthening or shortening it. The effects of SSRIs on menstrual
cycle length are mostly unknown and may warrant careful monitoring in
women of reproductive age.
Off-Label Uses
The anorgasmic effects of SSRIs make them
useful as a treatment for men with premature ejaculation. The SSRIs permit
intercourse for a significantly more extended period and are reported to
improve sexual satisfaction in couples in which the man has premature
ejaculation. Fluoxetine and sertraline are useful for this purpose.
PREMATURE EJACULATION.

The SSRIs may reduce obsessive-compulsive behavior in
people with paraphilias. The SSRIs diminish the average time per day spent
in unconventional sexual fantasies, urges, and activities. Evidence suggests a
more significant response to sexual obsessions than for paraphilic behavior.
PARAPHILIAS.

Obsessive-compulsive behavior, poor social relatedness, and
aggression are prominent autistic features that may respond to serotonergic
agents such as SSRIs and clomipramine (Anafranil). Sertraline and
fluvoxamine have been shown in controlled and open-label trials to mitigate
aggressiveness, self-injurious behavior, repetitive behaviors, some degree of
language delay, and (rarely) lack of social relatedness in adults with autistic
AUTISM.




<<<PAGE 1991>>>

Sweating. Some patients experience sweating while being treated with
SSRIs. This sweating is independent of the temperature in the environment.
Nocturnal sweating may drench bed sheets and require a change of
nightclothes. Terazosin (Hytrin), 1 or 2 mg/day, is often dramatically
effective in counteracting sweating.
Overdose. The adverse reactions associated with overdose of vilazodone at
doses of 200 to 280 mg, as observed in clinical trials, included serotonin
syndrome, lethargy, restlessness, hallucinations, and disorientation.
Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitor Withdrawal. The abrupt
discontinuance of SSRI use, especially one with a shorter half-life such as
paroxetine or fluvoxamine, has been associated with a withdrawal syndrome
that may include dizziness, weakness, nausea, headache, rebound depression,
anxiety, insomnia, poor concentration, upper respiratory symptoms,
paresthesias, and migraine-like symptoms. It usually does not appear until
after at least 6 weeks of treatment and usually resolves spontaneously in 3
weeks. Persons who experienced transient adverse effects in the first weeks
of taking an SSRI are more likely to experience discontinuation symptoms.
Fluoxetine is the SSRI least likely to be associated with this syndrome
because the half-life of its metabolite is more than 1 week, and it effectively
tapers itself. Fluoxetine has therefore been used in some cases to treat the
discontinuation syndrome caused by the termination of other SSRIs.
Nevertheless, a delayed and attenuated withdrawal syndrome occurs with
fluoxetine as well.
Drug Interactions
The SSRIs do not interfere with most other drugs. A serotonin syndrome
(Table 21-17) can develop with concurrent administration of MAOIs, Ltryptophan, lithium, or other antidepressants that inhibit the reuptake of
serotonin. Fluoxetine, sertraline, and paroxetine can raise plasma
concentrations of TCAs, which can cause clinical toxicity. Several potential
pharmacokinetic interactions have been described based on in vitro analyses
of the CYP enzymes, but clinically relevant interactions are rare. SSRIs that
inhibit CYP2D6 may interfere with the analgesic effects of hydrocodone and
oxycodone. These drugs can also reduce the effectiveness of tamoxifen




<<<PAGE 1992>>>

(Nolvadex, Soltamox). The combined use of SSRIs and NSAIDs increases
the risk of gastric bleeding.
Table 21-17
Serotonin Syndrome Symptoms
Diarrhea

Myoclonus

Diaphoresis

Hyperactive reflexes

Tremor

Disorientation

Ataxia

Lability of mood

The SSRIs, particularly fluvoxamine, should not be used with clozapine
because it raises clozapine concentrations, increasing the risk of seizure. The
SSRIs may increase the duration and severity of zolpidem (Ambien)-induced
side effects, including hallucinations.
Fluoxetine. Fluoxetine can be administered with tricyclic drugs, but the
clinician should use low dosages of the tricyclic drug. Because the hepatic
enzyme CYP2D6 metabolizes it, fluoxetine may interfere with the
metabolism of other drugs in the 7 percent of the population who have an
inefficient isoform of this enzyme, the so-called poor metabolizers.
Fluoxetine may slow down the metabolism of carbamazepine (Tegretol),
antineoplastic agents, diazepam (Valium), and phenytoin (Dilantin). Drug
interactions have been described for fluoxetine that may affect the plasma
levels of benzodiazepines, antipsychotics, and lithium. Fluoxetine and other
SSRIs may interact with warfarin (Coumadin), increasing the risk of bleeding
and bruising.
Sertraline. Sertraline may displace warfarin from plasma proteins and may
increase the prothrombin time. The drug interaction data on sertraline support
a generally similar profile to that of fluoxetine, although sertraline does not
interact as strongly with the CYP2D6 enzyme.
Paroxetine. Paroxetine has a higher risk for drug interactions than does
either fluoxetine or sertraline because it is a more potent inhibitor of the




<<<PAGE 1994>>>

coadministered with CYP3A4 potent inhibitors. Concomitant use with
inducers of CYP3A4 can result in inadequate drug concentrations and may
diminish effectiveness. The effect of CYP3A4 inducers on the systemic
exposure of vilazodone has not been evaluated.
Laboratory Interferences
In general, the SSRIs do not interfere with any laboratory tests. There have
been some reports of false-positive urine toxicology for benzodiazepines in
patients taking sertraline; if this is suspected, additional confirmation can be
sought via gas chromatography-mass spectrometry.
Dosage and Clinical Guidelines
Fluoxetine. Fluoxetine is available in 10- and 20-mg capsules, in a scored
10-mg tablet, as a 90-mg enteric-coated capsule for once-weekly
administration, and as an oral concentrate (20 mg/5 mL). Fluoxetine is also
marketed as Sarafem for PMDD. For depression, the initial dosage is usually
10 or 20 mg orally each day, usually given in the morning, because insomnia
is a potential adverse effect of the drug. Fluoxetine should be taken with food
to minimize possible nausea. The long half-lives of the drug and its
metabolite contribute to 4 weeks to reach steady-state concentrations. Twenty
milligrams is often as effective as higher doses for treating depression. The
maximum dosage recommended by the manufacturer is 80 mg a day. To
minimize the early side effects of anxiety and restlessness, some clinicians
initiate fluoxetine use at 5 to 10 mg a day, either with the scored 10-mg tablet
or by using the liquid preparation. Alternatively, because of the long half-life
of fluoxetine, its use can be initiated with an every-other-day administration
schedule. The dosage of fluoxetine (and other SSRIs) that is effective in other
indications may differ from the dosage generally used for depression.
Sertraline. Sertraline is available in scored 25-, 50-, and 100-mg tablets. For
the initial treatment of depression, sertraline use should be initiated with a
dosage of 50 mg once daily. To limit the GI effects, some clinicians begin at
25 mg a day and increase to 50 mg a day after 3 weeks. Patients who do not
respond after 1 to 3 weeks may benefit from dosage increases of 50 mg every
week up to a maximum of 200 mg given once daily. Sertraline can be




<<<PAGE 2009>>>

presence of these waveforms in individuals taking a medication known to
lower the seizure threshold may be a risk factor for developing seizures.
Other risk factors for seizures include a history of seizures, use of alcohol,
recent benzodiazepine withdrawal, organic brain disease, head trauma, or
pretreatment epileptiform discharges on EEG.
The use of bupropion by pregnant women is not associated with a specific
risk of an increased rate of congenital disabilities. Bupropion is secreted in
breast milk, so the use of bupropion in nursing women should be based on the
clinical circumstances of the patient and the judgment of the clinician.
Few deaths have been reported after overdoses of bupropion. Poor
outcomes are associated with cases of massive doses and mixed-drug
overdoses. Seizures occur in about one-third of all overdoses and are dosedependent, with those having seizures ingesting a significantly higher median
dose. Fatalities can involve uncontrollable seizures, sinus bradycardia, and
cardiac arrest. Symptoms of poisoning most often involve seizures, sinus
tachycardia, hypertension, GI symptoms, hallucinations, and agitation. All
seizures are typically brief and self-limited. In general, however, bupropion is
safer in overdose cases than are other antidepressants except for perhaps
SSRIs.
Drug Interactions
Given the fact that bupropion is frequently combined with SSRIs or
venlafaxine, potential interactions are significant. Bupropion has been found
to affect the pharmacokinetics of venlafaxine. One study noted a significant
increase in venlafaxine levels and a consequent decrease in its main
metabolite O-desmethylvenlafaxine during combined treatment with
sustained-release bupropion. Bupropion hydroxylation is weakly inhibited by
venlafaxine. No significant changes in plasma levels of the SSRIs paroxetine
and fluoxetine have been reported. However, few case reports indicate that
the combination of bupropion and fluoxetine (Prozac) may be associated with
panic, delirium, or seizures. Bupropion, in combination with lithium
(Eskalith), may rarely cause CNS toxicity, including seizures.
Because of the possibility of inducing a hypertensive crisis, bupropion
should not be used concurrently with MAOIs. At least 14 days should pass
after the discontinuation of an MAOI before initiating treatment with




<<<PAGE 2040>>>

or sympathomimetics
SSRIs, clomipramine, venlafaxine, sibutramine
Sympathomimetics (amphetamines, cocaine, methylphenidate,
dopamine, epinephrine, norepinephrine, isoproterenol,
ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, phenylpropanolamine)
L-Tryptophan
Use Carefully
Anticholinergics
Antihistamines
Disulfiram
Bromocriptine
Hydralazine
Sedative-hypnotics
Terpin hydrate with codeine
Tricyclics and tetracyclics (avoid clomipramine)
SSRI, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor.

When switching from an irreversible MAOI to any other type of
antidepressant drug, persons should wait at least 14 days after the last dose of
the MAOI before beginning the use of the next drug to allow replenishment
of the body’s MAOs. When switching from an antidepressant to an
irreversible MAOI, persons should wait 10 to 14 days (or 5 weeks for
fluoxetine [Prozac]) before starting the use of the MAOI to avoid drug–drug
interactions. In contrast, MAO activity recovers completely 24 to 48 hours
after the last dose of a RIMA.
The effects of the MAOIs on hepatic enzymes are poorly studied.
Tranylcypromine inhibits CYP2C19. Moclobemide inhibits CYP2D6,
CYP2C19, and CYP1A2 and is a substrate for 2C19.
Cimetidine (Tagamet) and fluoxetine significantly reduce the elimination
of moclobemide. Modest doses of fluoxetine and moclobemide administered
concurrently may be well tolerated, with no significant pharmacodynamic or
pharmacokinetic interactions.
Laboratory Interferences
MAOIs may lower blood glucose concentrations. MAOIs artificially raise




<<<PAGE 2091>>>

Cyclosporine
Desipramine
Dicumarol
Doxepin
Doxycycline
Ethosuximide
Felbamate
Fentanyl
Fluphenazine
Haloperidol
Hormonal contraceptives
Imipramine
Lamotrigine
Methadone
Methsuximide
Methylprednisolone
Nimodipine
Pancuronium
Phensuximide
Phenytoin
Primidone
Theophylline
Valproate
Warfarin
Carbamazepine may increase drug
plasma concentrations of
Clomipramine
Phenytoin
Primidone

Fluoxetine
Fluvoxamine
Gemfibrozil
Itraconazole
Ketoconazole
Isoniazida
Itraconazole
Lamotrigine
Loratadine
Macrolides
Nefazodone
Nicotinamide
Propoxyphene
Terfenadine
Troleandomycin
Valproatea
Verapamil
Viloxazine
Drugs that may decrease
carbamazepine plasma
concentrations
Carbamazepine
(autoinduction)
Cisplatin
Doxorubicin HCl
Felbamate
Phenobarbital
Phenytoin
Primidone
Rifampinb
Theophylline
Valproate

aIncreased concentrations of the active 10,11-epoxide.
bDecreased concentrations of carbamazepine and increased concentrations of the 10,11-

epoxide.
Table by Carlos A. Zarate, Jr., M.D. and Mauricio Tohen, M.D.


