<<<PAGE 918>>>

dizziness;
headache;
anxiety;
fatigue

headache; back
pain; infection;
flu syndrome;
chills;
somnolence;
decreased libido;
amnesia;
confusion

Examples of drug Opioid
No clinically
interactions
analgesics
relevant
(blocks
interactions
action);
known
yohimbine
(use with
naltrexone
increases
negative drug
effects)

Usual adult
dosage

Amitriptyline;
anticoagulants
such as
warfarin;
diazepam;
isoniazid;
metronidazole;
phenytoin;
theophylline;
warfarin; any
nonprescription
drug-containing
alcohol

Oral dose: 50
Oral dose: 666 mg Oral dose: 250
mg daily
(two 333-mg
mg daily (range
before
tablets) three
125–500 mg)
prescribing:
times daily or, for
before
evaluate for
patients with
prescribing:
possible
moderate renal
warn that the
current opioid
impairment (CrCl
patient should
use; consider
30–50 mL/min),
not take
a urine
reduce to 333
disulfiram for at
toxicology
mg (one tablet)
least 12 hr after
screen for
three times daily
drinking and
opioids,
before
that a
including
prescribing:
disulfiramsynthetic
establish
alcohol reaction




<<<PAGE 1523>>>

antidepressants that may be helpful include other SSRIs (although concerns
about prolonged QT intervals with higher doses limit the utility of citalopram
in this population), TCAs (particularly amitriptyline and desipramine),
trazodone, and monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs). Bupropion is
contraindicated due to an increased risk of seizure in this population. In
general, most of the antidepressants other than fluoxetine have been effective
at dosages usually given in the treatment of depressive disorders. Medication
is helpful in patients with comorbid depressive disorders and bulimia
nervosa. Topiramate may have some efficacy in reducing binge episodes in
bulimia nervosa, as may lisdexamfetamine. Evidence indicates that CBT and
medications (particularly fluoxetine) are the most effective combination.
Treatment of Binge-Eating Disorder
Psychotherapy. CBT is the most effective psychological treatment for
binge-eating disorder and should be considered a first-line treatment. CBT
can lead to decreases in binge eating and associated problems (e.g.,
depression); however, studies have not shown marked weight loss as a result
of CBT. CBT combined with psychopharmacological treatments such as
SSRIs shows better results than CBT alone. Exercise has also shown a
reduction in binge eating when combined with CBT. Interpersonal
psychotherapy (IPT) is also effective in the treatment of binge-eating
disorder; however, therapy focuses more on the interpersonal problems that
contribute to the disorder rather than disturbances in eating behavior. There is
also some evidence for the use of dialectical behavior therapy for bingeeating disorder.
Psychopharmacotherapy. Symptoms of binge eating may benefit from
medication treatment, with strong evidence supporting the use of
lisdexamfetamine for both weight loss and reduction of binge episodes.
Antidepressant medications have demonstrated improvement in binge eating,
but typically do not result in sustained weight loss; these include fluoxetine,
fluvoxamine, citalopram, escitalopram, sertraline, duloxetine, and bupropion.
The anticonvulsants topiramate and zonisamide may improve binge-eating
disorder, particularly with moderate weight loss. Topiramate may also reduce
binge episodes.




<<<PAGE 1674>>>

drugs, and the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), among others,
have been implicated in retarded ejaculation. Also, we should differentiate
delayed ejaculation from retrograde ejaculation, in which ejaculation occurs
but the seminal fluid passes back into the bladder. Retrograde ejaculation
always has an organic cause. It can develop after genitourinary surgery, and it
is also associated with medications that have anticholinergic adverse effects,
such as the phenothiazines.
Other Female Sexual Dysfunction due to a General Medical
Condition. Some medical conditions—specifically, endocrine diseases such
as hypothyroidism, diabetes mellitus, and primary hyperprolactinemia—can
affect a woman’s ability to have orgasms. Several drugs also affect some
women’s capacity to have orgasms (Table 16-12). Antihypertensive
medications, CNS stimulants, tricyclic drugs, SSRIs, and, frequently,
monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs) have interfered with female
orgasmic capacity. One study of women taking MAOIs, however, found that
after 16 to 18 weeks of pharmacotherapy, the adverse effect of the medication
disappeared, and the women were able to reexperience orgasms, although
they continued taking an undiminished dose of the drug.
Table 16-10
Some Pharmacologic Agents Implicated in Male Sexual
Dysfunctions
Drug

Impairs
Erection

Impairs
Ejaculation

Imipramine (Tofranil)

+

+

Protriptyline (Vivactil)

+

+

Desipramine (Pertofrane)

+

+

Clomipramine (Anafranil)

+

+

Amitriptyline (Elavil)

+

+

Psychiatric drugs
Cyclic drugsa




<<<PAGE 1944>>>

Drug Interactions. Clozapine should not be used with any other drug that
is associated with the development of agranulocytosis or bone marrow
suppression. Such drugs include carbamazepine, phenytoin, propylthiouracil,
sulfonamides, and captopril (Capoten). Lithium combined with clozapine
may increase the risk of seizures, confusion, and movement disorders.
Lithium should not be used in combination with clozapine by persons who
have experienced an episode of neuroleptic malignant syndrome.
Clomipramine (Anafranil) can increase the risk of seizure by lowering the
seizure threshold and by increasing clozapine plasma concentrations.
Risperidone, fluoxetine, paroxetine, and fluvoxamine increase serum
concentrations of clozapine. The addition of paroxetine may precipitate
clozapine-associated neutropenia.
Side Effects. The most common drug-related adverse effects are sedation,
dizziness, syncope, tachycardia, hypotension, electrocardiography (ECG)
changes, nausea, and vomiting. Other common adverse effects include
fatigue, weight gain, various GI symptoms (most commonly constipation),
anticholinergic effects, and subjective muscle weakness. Sialorrhea, or
hypersalivation, is a side effect that begins early in treatment and is most
evident at night. Patients report that their pillows are drenched with saliva.
This side effect is most likely the result of impairment of swallowing.
Although there are reports that clonidine or amitriptyline may help reduce
hypersalivation, the most practical solution is to put a towel over the pillow.
The risk of seizures is about 4 percent in patients taking dosages greater
than 600 mg a day. Leukopenia, granulocytopenia, agranulocytosis, and fever
occur in about 1 percent of patients. During the first year of treatment, there
is a 0.73 percent risk of clozapineinduced agranulocytosis. The risk during the second year is 0.07 percent. For
neutropenia, the risk is 2.32 percent and 0.69 percent, respectively, during the
first and second years of treatment. The only contraindications to the use of
clozapine are a WBC count below 3,500 cells/mm3; a previous bone marrow
disorder; a history of agranulocytosis during clozapine treatment; or the use
of another drug that is known to suppress the bone marrow, such as
carbamazepine (Tegretol).
During the first 6 months of treatment, weekly WBC counts are indicated
to monitor the patient for the development of agranulocytosis. If the WBC




<<<PAGE 1998>>>

muscle tension following abrupt discontinuation of vortioxetine 15 or 20
mg/day. It is recommended that the dose be decreased to 10 mg/day for 1
week before full discontinuation of vortioxetine 15 or 20 mg/day.
Vortioxetine is available in 5-, 10-, 15-, and 20-mg tablets.

SELECTIVE SEROTONIN–NOREPINEPHRINE REUPTAKE
INHIBITORS
There are currently four SNRIs approved for use in the United States:
venlafaxine (Effexor and Effexor XR), desvenlafaxine succinate (DVS;
Pristiq), duloxetine (Cymbalta), and levomilnacipran (Fetzima). A fifth
SNRI, milnacipran (Savella), available in other countries as an
antidepressant, has U.S. FDA approval in the United States as a treatment for
fibromyalgia. The term SNRI reflects the belief that the therapeutic effects of
these medications are mediated by concomitant blockade of neuronal
serotonin (5-HT) and norepinephrine uptake transporters. The SNRIs are also
sometimes referred to as dual reuptake inhibitors, a broader functional class
of antidepressant medications that include TCAs such as clomipramine
(Anafranil) and, to a lesser extent, imipramine (Tofranil) and amitriptyline
(Elavil). What distinguishes the SNRIs from TCAs is their relative lack of
affinity for other receptors, especially muscarinic, histaminergic, and the
families of α- and β-adrenergic receptors. This distinction is an important one
because the SNRIs have a more favorable tolerability profile than the older
dual reuptake inhibitors.
Venlafaxine and Desvenlafaxine
Therapeutic Indications. Venlafaxine is approved for the treatment of
four disorders: MDD, GAD, social anxiety disorder, and panic disorder.
MDD is currently the only FDA-approved indication for DVS.
DEPRESSION. The FDA does not recognize any class of antidepressants as

being more effective than any other. This does not mean that differences do
not exist, but no study to date has sufficiently demonstrated such superiority.
It has been argued that direct modulation of serotonin and norepinephrine
may convey more significant antidepressant effects than are exerted by




<<<PAGE 1999>>>

medications that selectively enhance only noradrenergic or serotoninergic
neurotransmission. This more significant therapeutic benefit could result
from an acceleration of postsynaptic adaptation to increased neuronal
signaling, simultaneous activation of two pathways for intracellular signal
transduction, additive effects on the activity of relevant genes such as brainderived neurotrophic factor, or, quite simply, broader coverage of depressive
symptoms. Clinical evidence supporting this hypothesis first emerged in a
pair of studies conducted by the Danish University Antidepressant Group,
which found an advantage for the dual reuptake inhibitor clomipramine
compared with SSRIs citalopram (Celexa) and paroxetine (Paxil). Another
report, which compared the results of a group of patients prospectively
treated with the combination of desipramine (Norpramin) and fluoxetine
(Prozac) with a historical comparison group treated with desipramine alone,
provided additional support. A meta-analysis of 25 inpatient studies
comparing the efficacy of TCAs and SSRIs yielded the most substantial
evidence. Specifically, although the TCAs were found to have a modest
overall advantage, superiority versus SSRIs was almost entirely explained by
the studies that used the TCAs that are considered to be dual reuptake
inhibitors—clomipramine, amitriptyline, and imipramine. Meta-analyses of
head-to-head studies suggest that venlafaxine has the potential to induce
higher rates of remission in depressed patients than do the SSRIs. This
difference in the venlafaxine advantage is about 6 percent. DVS has not been
extensively compared with other classes of antidepressants concerning
efficacy.
The extended-release formulation of
venlafaxine is approved for the treatment of GAD. In clinical trials lasting 6
months, dosages of 75 to 225 mg a day were effective in treating insomnia,
poor concentration, restlessness, irritability, and excessive muscle tension
related to GAD.
GENERALIZED ANXIETY DISORDER.

SOCIAL ANXIETY DISORDER. The extended-release formulation of venlafaxine

is approved for the treatment of social anxiety disorder. Its efficacy was
established in 12-week studies.
OTHER INDICATIONS. Case reports and uncontrolled studies have indicated that




<<<PAGE 2022>>>

led to the development of a new class of antidepressant compounds, the
tricyclics (TCAs). In turn, the finding that imipramine blocked reuptake of
norepinephrine led to research into the role of catecholamines in depression.
After the introduction of imipramine, several other antidepressant compounds
were developed that shared a basic tricyclic structure and had relatively
similar effects. Later, other heterocyclic compounds were also marketed that
were somewhat similar in structure and that had relatively comparable
secondary properties. At one time, amitriptyline (Elavil, Endep) and
imipramine were the two most commonly prescribed antidepressants in the
United States. However, because of their anticholinergic and antihistaminic
side effects, they are rarely used for depression. Nortriptyline (Aventyl,
Pamelor) and desipramine (Norpramin, Pertofrane) became preferred.
Nortriptyline has the least effect on orthostatic hypotension, and desipramine
is the least anticholinergic. Although introduced as antidepressants, the
therapeutic indications for these agents have grown to include panic disorder,
GAD, PTSD, OCD, and pain syndromes. The introduction of newer
antidepressant agents with more selective actions on neurotransmitters or
with unique mechanisms of action has sharply reduced the prescribing of
TCAs and tetracyclics. The improved safety profiles of the newer drugs,
especially when taken in overdose, also contributed to the decline in the use
of older drugs. Nevertheless, the TCAs and tetracyclics remain unsurpassed
in terms of their antidepressant efficacy. Table 21-20 lists TCA and
tetracyclic drugs and their available preparations.
Pharmacologic Actions
The absorption of most TCAs is complete after oral administration, and there
is significant metabolism from the first-pass effect. Peak plasma
concentrations occur within 2 to 8 hours, and the half-lives of the TCAs vary
from 10 to 70 hours; nortriptyline, maprotiline (Ludiomil), and particularly
protriptyline (Vivactil) can have longer half-lives. The long half-lives allow
all the compounds to be given once daily; 5 to 7 days is needed to reach
steady-state plasma concentrations. Imipramine pamoate (Tofranil) is a depot
form of the drug for intramuscular (IM) administration; indications for the
use of this preparation are limited.
The TCAs undergo hepatic metabolism by the CYP450 enzyme system.




<<<PAGE 2024>>>

weight gain, and sleep disturbances than the SSRIs. The half-lives and
plasma clearance for most TCAs are very similar.
Therapeutic Indications
The indications are similar to those for the SSRIs, which have widely
replaced the TCAs. However, the TCAs represent a reasonable alternative for
persons who cannot tolerate the adverse effects of the SSRIs.
Major Depressive Disorder. The treatment of a major depressive episode
and the prophylactic treatment of MDD are the principal indications for using
TCAs. Although the TCAs are effective in the treatment of depression in
persons with bipolar I disorder, they are more likely to induce mania,
hypomania, or cycling than the newer antidepressants, most notably the
SSRIs and bupropion. It is thus not advised that TCAs be routinely used to
treat depression associated with bipolar I or bipolar II disorder.
Melancholic features, prior major depressive episodes, and a family history
of depressive disorders increase the likelihood of therapeutic response. All of
the available TCAs are equally effective in the treatment of depressive
disorders. In the case of a person, however, one tricyclic or tetracyclic may be
useful, and another one may be ineffective. The treatment of a major
depressive episode with psychotic features almost always requires the
coadministration of an antipsychotic drug and an antidepressant.
Although it is used worldwide as an antidepressant, clomipramine is only
approved in the United States for the treatment of OCD.
Panic Disorder with Agoraphobia. Imipramine is the TCA most studied
for panic disorder with agoraphobia, but other TCAs are also useful when
taken at the usual antidepressant dosages. Because of the potential initial
anxiogenic effects of the TCAs, starting dosages should be small, and the
dosage should be titrated upward slowly. Small doses of benzodiazepines
may be used initially to deal with this side effect.
Generalized Anxiety Disorder. The FDA approves the use of doxepin for
the treatment of anxiety disorders. Some research data show that imipramine
may also be useful. Although rarely used anymore, a chlordiazepoxide–
amitriptyline combination (Limbitrol) is available for mixed anxiety and




<<<PAGE 2025>>>

depressive disorders.
Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder. Patients with OCD appear to respond
specifically to clomipramine, as well as the SSRIs. Some improvement is
usually seen in 2 to 4 weeks, but a further reduction in symptoms may
continue for the first 4 to 5 months of treatment. None of the other TCAs
appears to be nearly as effective as clomipramine for the treatment of this
disorder. Clomipramine may also be a drug of choice for depressed persons
with marked obsessive features.
Pain. The TCAs are widely used to treat chronic neuropathic pain and in the
prophylaxis of migraine headache. Amitriptyline is the TCA most often used
in this role. During the treatment of pain, doses are generally lower than those
used in depression; for example, 75 mg of amitriptyline may be sufficient.
These effects also appear more rapidly.
Other Disorders. Childhood enuresis is often treated with imipramine.
Peptic ulcer disease can be treated with doxepin, which has marked
antihistaminergic effects. Other indications for the TCAs are narcolepsy,
nightmare disorder, and PTSD. The drugs are sometimes used for the
treatment of children and adolescents with ADHD, sleepwalking disorder,
separation anxiety disorder, and sleep terror disorder. Clomipramine has also
been used to treat premature ejaculation, movement disorders, and
compulsive behavior in children with autistic disorders; however, because the
TCAs have caused sudden death in several children and adolescents, they
should not be used in children.
Precautions and Adverse Reactions
The TCAs are associated with a wide range of problematic side effects and
can be lethal when taken in overdose.
Psychiatric Effects. The TCAs can induce a switch to mania or
hypomania in susceptible individuals. The TCAs may also exacerbate
psychotic disorders in susceptible persons. At high plasma concentrations
(levels above 300 ng/mL), the anticholinergic effects of the TCAs can cause
confusion or delirium. Patients with dementia are particularly vulnerable to




<<<PAGE 2027>>>

are discontinued. It can result in falls and injuries in affected persons.
Nortriptyline may be the drug least likely to cause this problem. Orthostatic
hypotension is treated with avoidance of caffeine, intake of at least 2 L of
fluid per day, and addition of salt to the diet unless the person is being treated
for hypertension. In persons taking antihypertensive agents, reduction of the
dosage may reduce the risk of orthostatic hypotension. Other possible
autonomic effects are profuse sweating, palpitations, and increased BP.
Although some persons respond to fludrocortisone (Florinef), 0.02 to 0.05 mg
twice a day, the drug has potential toxicities. It is preferable to substitute an
SSRI than to use a mineralocorticoid such as fludrocortisone. The TCAs’ use
should be discontinued several days before elective surgery because of the
occurrence of hypertensive episodes during surgery in persons receiving
TCAs.
Sedation. Sedation is a common effect of the TCAs and may be welcomed
if sleeplessness has been a problem. The sedative effect of the TCAs is a
result of anticholinergic and antihistaminergic activities. Amitriptyline,
trimipramine, and doxepin are the most sedating agents; imipramine,
amoxapine, nortriptyline, and maprotiline are less sedating; and desipramine
and protriptyline are the least sedating agents.
Neurologic Effects. A fine, rapid tremor may occur. Myoclonic twitches
and tremors of the tongue and the upper extremities are common. Rare effects
include speech blockage, paresthesia, peroneal palsies, and ataxia.
Amoxapine is unique in causing parkinsonian symptoms, akathisia, and
even dyskinesia because of the dopaminergic blocking activity of one of its
metabolites. Amoxapine may also cause neuroleptic malignant syndrome in
rare cases. Maprotiline may cause seizures when the dosage is increased too
quickly or is kept at high levels for too long. Clomipramine and amoxapine
may lower the seizure threshold more than other drugs in the class. As a
class, however, the TCAs have a relatively low risk for inducing seizures
except in persons who are at risk for seizures (e.g., persons with epilepsy and
those with brain lesions). Although such persons can still use the TCAs, the
initial dosages should be lower than usual, and subsequent dosage increases
should be gradual.




<<<PAGE 2031>>>

than are young adults. In children, the ECG should be regularly monitored
during the use of a TCA.
The available preparations of TCAs are presented in Table 21-20. The
dosages and therapeutic blood levels for the TCAs vary among the drugs
(Table 21-21). Except for protriptyline, all of the TCAs should be started at
25 mg a day and increased as tolerated. Divided doses at first reduce the
severity of the adverse effects, although most of the dosage should be given
at night to help induce sleep if a sedating drug such as amitriptyline is used.
Eventually, the entire daily dose can be given at bedtime. A common clinical
mistake is to stop increasing the dosage when the person is tolerating the drug
but taking less than the maximum therapeutic dose and does not show clinical
improvement. The clinician should routinely assess the person’s pulse and
orthostatic changes in BP while the dosage is being increased.
Nortriptyline use should be started at 25 mg a day. Most patients need only
75 mg a day to achieve a blood level of 100 mg/nL. However, the dosage
may be raised to 150 mg a day if needed. Amoxapine use should be started at
150 mg a day and raised to 400 mg a day. Protriptyline use should be started
at 15 mg a day and raised to 60 mg a day. Maprotiline has been associated
with an increased incidence of seizures. This risk is most significant if the
dosage is raised too quickly or is maintained at too high a level. Maprotiline
use should be started at 25 mg a day and increased over 4 weeks to 225 mg a
day. It should be kept at that level for only 6 weeks and then be reduced to
175 to 200 mg a day.
Persons with chronic pain may be particularly sensitive to adverse effects
when TCA use is started. Therefore, treatment should begin with low dosages
that are raised in small increments. However, persons with chronic pain may
experience relief on long-term low-dosage therapy, such as amitriptyline or
nortriptyline at 10 to 75 mg a day.
Table 21-21
General Information for the Tricyclic and Tetracyclic
Antidepressants
Generic
Name

Trade Name Usual Adult
Dosage Range
(mg/day)

Therapeutic Plasma
Concentrations
(µg/mL)




<<<PAGE 2032>>>

Imipramine

Tofranil

150–300

150–300a

Desipramine

Norpramin,
150–300
Pertofrane

150–300a

Trimipramine Surmontil

150–300

150–300

Amitriptyline

Elavil, Endep 150–300

100–250b

Nortriptyline

Pamelor,
Aventyl

50–150

50–150a (maximum)

Protriptyline

Vivactil

15–60

75–250

Amoxapine

Asendin

150–400

200–500c

Doxepin

Adapin,
Sinequan

150–300

100–250a

Maprotiline

Ludiomil

150–230

150–300a

Clomipramine Anafranil

130–250

50 to 250c

aExact range may vary among laboratories.
bIncludes parent compound and desmethyl metabolite.
cEstimated from limited studies.

The TCAs should be avoided in children except as a last resort. Dosing
guidelines in children for imipramine include initiation at 1.5 mg/kg a day.
The dosage can be titrated to no more than 5 mg/kg a day. In enuresis, the
dosage is usually 50 to 100 mg a day, taken at bedtime. Clomipramine use
can be initiated at 50 mg a day and increased to no more than 3 mg/kg per
day or 200 mg a day.
When TCA treatment is discontinued, the dosage should first be decreased
to three-fourths the maximal dosage for a month. At that time, if no
symptoms are present, drug use can be tapered by 25 mg (5 mg for
protriptyline) every 4 to 7 days. Slow tapering avoids a cholinergic rebound
syndrome consisting of nausea, upset stomach, sweating, headache, neck
pain, and vomiting. This syndrome can be treated by reinstituting a small
dosage of the drug and tapering more slowly than before. Several case reports
note the appearance of rebound mania or hypomania after the abrupt




<<<PAGE 2077>>>

depressant (e.g., alcohol), and increased severity of extrapyramidal
symptoms, which usually responds to treatment with antiparkinsonian drugs.
Valproate can usually be safely combined with carbamazepine or SDAs.
Perhaps the most worrisome interaction of valproate and a psychotropic drug
involves lamotrigine. Since the approval of lamotrigine for the treatment of
bipolar disorder, it is more likely that patients will be treated with both
agents. Valproate more than doubles lamotrigine concentrations, increasing
the risk of a severe rash (Stevens–Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal
necrolysis).
The plasma concentrations of carbamazepine, diazepam (Valium),
amitriptyline (Elavil), nortriptyline (Pamelor), and phenobarbital (Luminal)
may also be increased when these drugs are coadministered with valproate.
Also, the plasma concentrations of phenytoin (Dilantin) and desipramine
(Norpramin) may be decreased when they are combined with valproate. The
plasma concentrations of valproate may be decreased when the drug is
coadministered with carbamazepine and may be increased when
coadministered with guanfacine (Tenex), amitriptyline, or fluoxetine
(Prozac). Valproate can be displaced from plasma proteins by carbamazepine,
diazepam, and aspirin. Persons who are treated with anticoagulants (e.g.,
aspirin and warfarin [Coumadin]) should also be monitored when valproate
use is initiated to assess the development of any undesired augmentation of
the anticoagulation effects. Interactions of valproate with other drugs are
listed in Table 21-34.
Table 21-34
Interactions of Valproate with Other Drugs
Drug

Interactions Reported with Valproate

Lithium

Increased tremor

Antipsychotics

Increased sedation; increased extrapyramidal
effects; delirium and stupor (single report)

Clozapine

Increased sedation; confusional syndrome (single
report)

Carbamazepine Acute psychosis (single report); ataxia, nausea,




<<<PAGE 2078>>>

lethargy (single report); may decrease valproate
serum concentrations
Antidepressants Amitriptyline and fluoxetine may increase valproate
serum concentrations
Diazepam

Serum concentration increased by valproate

Clonazepam

Absence status (rare; reported only in patients with
preexisting epilepsy)

Phenytoin

Serum concentration decreased by valproate

Phenobarbital

Serum concentration increased by valproate;
increased sedation

Other CNS
depressants

Increased sedation

Anticoagulants

Possible potentiation of effect

CNS, central nervous system.

Laboratory Interferences
Valproate may cause a laboratory increase of serum-free fatty acids.
Valproate metabolites may produce a false-positive test result for urinary
ketones as well as falsely abnormal thyroid function test results.
Table 21-35
Recommended Laboratory Tests during Valproate Therapy
Before Treatment
Standard chemistry screen with special attention to liver function
tests
CBC, including WBC and platelet count
During Treatment
Liver function tests at 1 mo; then every 6–24 mo if no
abnormalities are found.
Complete blood count with platelet count at 1 mo; then every 6–
24 mo if findings are normal.




<<<PAGE 2090>>>

consisting of fever, rash, eosinophilia, and possibly fatal myocarditis.
Cleft palate, fingernail hypoplasia, microcephaly, and spina bifida in
infants may be associated with the maternal use of carbamazepine during
pregnancy. Pregnant women should not use carbamazepine unless necessary.
All women with childbearing potential should take 1 to 4 mg of folic acid
daily, even if they are not trying to conceive. Carbamazepine is secreted in
breast milk.
Drug Interactions. Carbamazepine decreases serum concentrations of
numerous drugs as a result of the prominent induction of hepatic CYP3A4
(Table 21-39). Monitoring for a decrease in clinical effects is frequently
indicated. Carbamazepine can decrease the blood concentrations of oral
contraceptives, resulting in breakthrough bleeding and uncertain prophylaxis
against pregnancy. Carbamazepine should not be administered with MAOIs,
which should be discontinued at least 2 weeks before initiating treatment with
carbamazepine. Grapefruit juice inhibits the hepatic metabolism of
carbamazepine. When carbamazepine and valproate are used in combination,
the dosage of carbamazepine should be decreased because valproate displaces
carbamazepine binding on proteins, and the dosage of valproate may need to
be increased.
Table 21-39
Carbamazepine: Drug Interactions
Effect of Carbamazepine on Plasma Agents that May Affect
Concentrations of Concomitant
Carbamazepine Plasma
Agents
Concentrations
Carbamazepine may decrease drug Agents that may increase
plasma concentration of:
carbamazepine plasma
Acetaminophen
concentration:
Alprazolam
Allopurinol
Amitriptyline
Cimetidine
Bupropion
Clarithromycin
Clomipramine
Danazol
Clonazepam
Diltiazem
Clozapine
Erythromycin




<<<PAGE 2243>>>

brewers), which is used to treat depression, decreases the effectiveness of
certain psychotropic drugs such as amitriptyline (Elavil), alprazolam (Xanax),
paroxetine (Paxil), and sertraline (Zoloft), among others. Kava kava, which is
used to treat anxiety states, has been associated with liver toxicity.
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects are possible, and toxic interactions with other drugs may
occur with all phytomedicines, dietary supplements, and medicinal foods.
Adulteration is possible, especially with phytomedicines. There are few or no
consistent standard preparations available for most herbs. The FDA does not
test medical foods; however, strict voluntary compliance is required. Safety
profiles and knowledge of adverse effects of most of these substances have
not been studied rigorously, however. Because of the paucity of clinical
trials, all of these agents should be avoided during pregnancy; some herbs
may act as abortifacients, for example. Because most of these substances or
their metabolites are secreted in breast milk, they are contraindicated during
lactation.
Clinicians should always attempt to obtain a history of herbal use or the
use of medical foods or nutritional supplements during the psychiatric
evaluation.
It is important to be nonjudgmental in dealing with patients who use these
substances. Many do so for various reasons: (1) as part of their cultural
tradition, (2) because they mistrust physicians or are dissatisfied with
conventional medicine, or (3) because they experience relief of symptoms
with the particular substance. Because patients will be more cooperative with
traditional psychiatric treatments if they are allowed to continue using their
preparations, psychiatrists should keep an open mind and not attribute all
effects to suggestion. If psychotropic agents are prescribed, the clinician must
be extraordinarily alert to the possibility of adverse effects as a result of
drug–drug interactions, because many of these compounds have ingredients
that produce physiologic changes in the body.
Table 21-64
Phytomedicinals with Psychoactive Effects




<<<PAGE 2255>>>

Anton RF, Burch EA. Amoxapine versus amitriptyline combined with
perphenazine in the treatment of psychotic depression. Am J Psychiatry.
1990;147:1203–1208.
Appelhof BC, Brouwer JP, van Dyck R, Fliers E, Hoogendijk WJ.
Triiodothyronine addition to paroxetine in the treatment of major
depressive disorder. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2004;89:6271–6276.
Aronson R, Offman HJ, Joffe RT, Naylor CD. Triiodothyronine
augmentation and the treatment of refractory depression: a meta-analysis.
Arch Gen Psychiatry. 1996;35:842–848.
Ashton AK, Longdon MC. SSNRI-induced, dose dependent, nonmenstrual,
vaginal spotting and galactorrhea accompanied by prolactin elevation
(Letter). Am J Psychiatry. 2007;164:1121.
Baker GB, Sowa S, Todd KG. Amine oxidases and their inhibitors: what can
they tell us about neuroprotection and the development of drugs for
neuropsychiatric disorders? J Psychiatr Neurosci. 2007;32:313–315.
Baldessarini RJ, Pompili M, Tondo L. Suicidal risk in antidepressant drug
trials. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2006;63:246–248.
Balu DT, Hoshaw BA, Malberg JE. Differential regulation of central BDNF
protein levels by antidepressant and non-antidepressant drug treatments.
Brain Res. 2008;1211:37–43.
Banerjee S, Hellier J, Romeo R, Dewey M, Knapp M, Ballard C, Baldwin R,
Bentham P, Fox C, Holmes C, Katona C, Lawton C, Lindesay J,
Livingston G, McCrae N, Moniz-Cook E, Murray J, Nurock S, Orrell M,
O’Brien J, Poppe M, Thomas A, Walwyn R, Wilson K, Burns A. Study of
the use of antidepressants for depression in dementia: the HTA-SADD trial
—a multicentre, randomised, doubleblind, placebo-controlled trial of the clinical effectiveness and costeffectiveness of sertraline and mirtazapine. Health Technol Assess.
2013;17(7):1–166.
Barbui C, Esposito E, Cipriani A. Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors and
risk of suicide: a systematic review of observational studies. CMAJ.
2009;180:291–297.
Bauer M, Baur H, Bergebifer A, Strohle A, Hellweg R. Effects of
supraphysiological thyroxine administration in healthy controls in patients
with depressive disorders. J Affect Dis. 2002;68:285–294.
Baungartner A. Thyroxine and the treatment of affective disorders: an




<<<PAGE 3597>>>

Amitriptyline, 713
Amlodipine, 668
Ammonia levels, serum, 66
Ammon’s horn (Cornu Ammonis, CA), 941
Amnesia, 1025
medical causes of, 933
Amnestic disorders, 224, 245–249
anterograde amnesia, 246
causes of, 247, 247t, 249
clinical features and subtypes, 245–247
alcoholic blackouts, 247
cerebrovascular diseases, 246
electroconvulsive therapy, 247
head injuries, 247
Korsakoff syndrome, 246–247
multiple sclerosis, 246
transient global amnesia, 247
course and prognosis, 248
definition, 224
diagnosis, 245
differential diagnosis, 247–248
delirium, 247
dementia, 248, 248t
dissociative disorders, 248
factitious disorders, 248
normal aging, 248
epidemiology, 249
pathology and laboratory examination, 247
retrograde amnesia, 246
treatment, 248–249
psychotherapy, 248–249
Amniocentesis, 97
Amobarbital, 298
Amok, 1053
Amotivational syndrome, 289
Amphetamine-like substances, 302
Amphetamines, 302, 306–307, 710. See also Stimulant-related disorders




<<<PAGE 3647>>>

Eating disorders
medical complications of, 471t
psychiatric disorders with, 475t
scales for assessment of, 44–45
sleep-related, 499
Eating disorders examination (EDE), 44
self-report version (EDE-Q), 44
Economic rights, 841
Ecstasy. See 3,4-Methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA)
ECT. See Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT)
Education for all Handicapped Children Act of 1975, 100
Education, psychiatric interviews and, 14
Edwards Personal Preference Schedule (EPPS), 58t
EEG. See Electroencephalographic (EEG)
Effexor. See Venlafaxine
E4 genes, in Alzheimer disease, 240
EGL, 941
The Ego and the Id (Freud), 1064
Ego identity, 899
Ego instincts, 1060
Ego libido, 1064
Ego psychology, 1064–1068
character, 1068
defense mechanisms, 1065
functions of, 1064–1065
structural theory of mind, 1064
theory of anxiety, 1065
Eicosanoids, 977–978
Eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA), 977
Elavil. See Amitriptyline
Elder abuse, in the elderly, 808
Electrocardiogram (ECG), 67–68
Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT), 64, 439, 595, 922
adverse effects, 734–735
and amnesia, 247
associated with headaches, 735
for bipolar depression, 374


