<<<PAGE 414>>>

and inattention in preschoolers with autism spectrum disorder found the
stimulant safe and relatively efficacious; half of the preschoolers developed
side effects including increased stereotypies, gastrointestinal upset, sleep
problems, and emotional lability. Among nonstimulants, one double-blind
placebo-controlled study of hyperactivity, impulsivity, and inattention using
atomoxetine in children with autism spectrum disorder found that it was
significantly more effective than placebo. Side effects included sedation,
irritability, constipation, and nausea. Clonidine, an α-agonist, has also been
studied in children with autism spectrum disorder for the treatment of
hyperactivity with mixed results. Guanfacine may also help in some cases.
Repetitive and Stereotypic Behavior. Antidepressants and mood
stabilizers have been studied for the treatment of these core symptoms of
autism spectrum disorder. One study with fluoxetine found the medication
group only slightly better and not significantly better than the placebo group
regarding the target symptoms, and another trial with escitalopram found no
difference between groups. Risperidone, however, was found to be effective
in targeting irritability, and restrictive and repetitive behaviors were
improved. One study using valproate in a 12-week trial with 55 children with
a mean age of 9½ years with autism spectrum disorder found that those who
were considered responders to irritability also spent less time engaging in
repetitive behaviors.
Agents Administered for Behavioral Impairment in Autism
Spectrum Disorder Based On Open Trials. Quetiapine is an
antipsychotic with more potent 5-HT2A than D2 receptor blocking properties.
Although there are only open-label trials with this agent, some experts use
this when risperidone and olanzapine fail or are intolerable. Doses range from
50 to 200 mg/day. Adverse effects include drowsiness, tachycardia, agitation,
and weight gain.
Clozapine has a heterocyclic chemical structure that is related to certain
first-generation antipsychotics, such as loxapine, although clozapine carries a
lower risk of extrapyramidal symptoms. It is not generally used in the
treatment of aggression and self-injurious behavior unless those behaviors
coexist with psychotic symptoms. The most severe adverse effect is
agranulocytosis, which necessitates monitoring white blood cell count weekly




<<<PAGE 512>>>

agonist and a 5-HT2A antagonist. A multisite double-blind controlled study of
aripiprazole in children with Tourette disorder in China found a reduction in
tic behaviors in about 60 percent of the aripiprazole group compared to about
64 percent reduction in a group treated with tiapride, a benzamide with
selective D2 receptor antagonism. There was no significant difference
between the two groups. Although sedation and sleep disturbance are
common side effects with aripiprazole, weight gain is less pronounced than
with risperidone.
Olanzapine and ziprasidone are also efficacious in the treatment of tic
disorders in at least one RCT. Sedation and weight gain were prominent side
effects with olanzapine, and potential QT prolongation was an issue with
ziprasidone. Quetiapine is a potentially useful agent in the treatment of tics,
with its higher affinity for 5-HT2 receptors than for D2 receptors. However,
randomized clinical trials are needed. Clozapine, contrary to many other
atypical antipsychotics, is not useful in the treatment of tics.
NORADRENERGIC AGENTS.

Noradrenergic agents, including clonidine and
guanfacine, as well as atomoxetine, are frequently used in children as primary
treatments or adjunctive treatments for comorbid ADHD and tics. Several
studies have provided some evidence for the efficacy of clonidine, an α2adrenergic agent, in the treatment of tics in children, adolescents, and adults
with tic disorders. The largest randomized trial with oral clonidine compared
to placebo found a modest reduction in tics with clonidine. A multisite
randomized, double-blind placebo-controlled trial using the clonidine patch
in the treatment of tic disorders in children found a significant improvement
in tic symptoms (about 69 percent) compared to about 47 percent of the
children in the control group. The usual dose range for clonidine is from 0.05
mg orally three times daily to 0.1 mg four times daily, and for guanfacine, it
is from 1 to 4 mg/day. When used in these dosage ranges, adverse effects of
the α-adrenergic agents may include drowsiness, headache, irritability, and
occasional hypotension.
Guanfacine can treat children with ADHD successfully, although its
efficacy regarding reducing tics is controversial. In one randomized clinical
trial treating 34 children with ADHD and tics, guanfacine was superior to
placebo in the reduction of tics. In another double-blind placebo-controlled




<<<PAGE 552>>>

controlled study of sertraline to prevent PTSD found that children who
received sertraline, flexibly dosed between 25 and 150 mg/day, had a
decrease in parent-reported symptoms of PTSD over 8 weeks compared to a
placebo group. Among the child-reported symptoms, however, there was no
significant difference between the two groups.
Psychiatrists sometimes use antiadrenergic agents to treat dysregulation of
the noradrenergic system in adults and youth with PTSD. α2-Agonists such as
clonidine and guanfacine, for example, have been used to decrease
norepinephrine release, whereas centrally acting β-antagonists such as
propranolol, and α1-antagonists such as prazosin, are hypothesized to
improve hyperarousal and intrusive thoughts through attenuation of
norepinephrine postsynaptically. Although there are some data in adults with
PTSD to support the use of these agents, there are mainly case reports for
youths. There is a suggestion that guanfacine may reduce nightmares in
children with PTSD and that clonidine may diminish symptoms of
reenactment of traumatic events in children. One report of propranolol
treatment in 11 pediatric patients with PTSD from sexual or physical abuse
with a mean age of 8.5 years, who exhibited agitation and hyperarousal,
indicated some decrease in symptoms in 8 of the 11 children studied. Another
open study of transdermal clonidine treatment of preschoolers with PTSD
suggests that clonidine may be efficacious in this population in decreasing
activation and hyperarousal. An additional open trial of oral clonidine with
dosage ranges of 0.05 to 0.1 mg twice daily similarly suggests that this
medication may provide some relief for the symptoms of hyperarousal,
impulsivity, and agitation in young children with PTSD.
Second-generation antipsychotics such as risperidone, olanzapine,
quetiapine, ziprasidone, and aripiprazole have been studied in adults with
PTSD with mixed results. Risperidone and aripiprazole both have FDA
approval for use in children and adolescents with aggression, severe
behavioral dyscontrol, and severe psychiatric disorders; however, there are no
controlled trials with children with PTSD. For example, there is one case
series of three preschool-age children who exhibited symptoms of acute
stress disorder and who had severe thermal burns improved after being
treated with risperidone.
In children and adolescents with PTSD, there is one open-label trial of




<<<PAGE 582>>>

presence of lifetime psychosis, and bipolar disorder not otherwise specified
diagnosis. Over the follow-up period, about 20 percent of subjects with
bipolar II disorder converted to bipolar I disorder, and 25 percent of the
bipolar disorder not otherwise specified subjects developed bipolar I disorder
or bipolar II disorder during the follow-up period.
Similar to the natural history of bipolar disorders in adults, children have a
wide range of symptom severity in manic and depressed episodes. The more
frequent diagnostic conversions from bipolar II disorder to bipolar I disorder
among children and adolescents, compared with adults, highlight the lack of
stability of the bipolar II disorder diagnosis in youth. This is also the case
concerning conversion from bipolar disorder not otherwise specified to other
bipolar disorders. When bipolar disorder occurs in young children, recovery
rates are lower. Also, there is a higher likelihood mixed states and rapid
cycling, and higher rates of polarity changes compared with those who
develop bipolar disorders in late adolescence or early adulthood.

TREATMENT
Treatment of early-onset bipolar disorder incorporates multimodal
interventions including pharmacotherapy, psychoeducation, psychosocial
intervention with the family and the child, and school interventions to
optimize a child’s school adjustment and achievement.
Pharmacotherapy
Two classes of medications—atypical antipsychotics and mood-stabilizing
agents—are the most well-studied agents that provide efficacy in the
treatment of early-onset bipolar disorders. Eight RCTs have shown the
efficacy of atypical antipsychotic agents in the treatment of bipolar disorder
in youth between the ages of 10 and 17 years. These studies compared an
atypical antipsychotic to placebo, or compared an atypical antipsychotic to a
mood stabilizer, or added an antipsychotic to a mood-stabilizing agent. The
atypical antipsychotics included olanzapine, quetiapine, risperidone,
aripiprazole, and ziprasidone. All five of the atypical antipsychotic studies
demonstrated significant efficacy in the treatment of early-onset bipolar
manic or mixed states. A recent trial comparing quetiapine and valproate
found that both were efficacious, but the quetiapine was superior in the speed




<<<PAGE 661>>>

Ian was sent by ambulance to the hospital for the first time from school
when he tried to jump off a balcony on the second story of his school in
response to auditory hallucinations commanding him to kill himself.
During his hospitalization, his parents reluctantly consented to a
risperidone trial. The psychiatrist titrated Ian to 3 mg/day. His auditory
hallucinations improved moderately after 2 weeks of treatment. However,
he continued to be suspicious and mistrustful of his physicians and
family.
Ian’s family was perplexed as to what had caused Ian’s severe
symptoms, and the hospital treatment team met with his parents multiple
times during his hospitalization to reassure them that they had not caused
his illness and that their continued support might improve his chances of
improvement. After discharge from the hospital 30 days later, Ian was
placed in a special education program in a nonpublic school, and he was
assigned a psychotherapist who met regularly with him individually and
with his family. At the time of discharge from the hospital, Ian’s
symptoms had moderately improved, although he still had auditory
hallucinations intermittently. Over the next 5 years after the onset of his
illness, Ian had many exacerbations of his psychosis, and he was
hospitalized nine times, including placement in a long-term residential
program. Ian had received trials of olanzapine, quetiapine, and
aripiprazole, each of which seemed to lead to improvement for a while,
after which he was no longer responsive to the medications. Ian
continued to receive individual cognitive-behavioral therapy and family
therapy, and his family was very supportive. Even with these
interventions, Ian’s mental status continued to display tangential and
disorganized thinking, paranoid delusions, loose associations,
perseverative speech patterns, and a flat, at times, inappropriate affect. He
had periods in which he resorted to pacing and muttering to himself, with
no social interaction with others unless initiated by adults. Finally, Ian
achieved significant improvement after being placed on clozapine
therapy, although he remained mildly symptomatic. (Adapted from a case
by Jon M. McClellan, M.D.)
Pathology and Laboratory Examinations




<<<PAGE 750>>>

Risperidone

0.5–1 mg a EPS concerns
day

Limited data in
delirium

Olanzapine

5–10 mg a
day

Higher mortality
in dementia
patients

Quetiapine

25–150 mg More sedating
a day

Metabolic
syndrome

Benzodiazepine
Lorazepam

0.5–3 mg a Respiratory
day and
depression,
as
paradoxical
needed
agitation
every 4
hr

Best use in
delirium
secondary to
alcohol or
benzodiazepine
withdrawal
Can worsen other
types of
delirium

EPIDEMIOLOGY
Delirium is a common disorder, with most incidence and prevalence rates
reported in elderly adults. In community studies, 1 percent of elderly persons
age 55 years or older have delirium (13 percent in the age 85 years and older
group in the community). Among elderly emergency department patients, 5
to 10 percent have delirium. At the time of admission to medical wards,
between 15 and 21 percent of older patients meet the criteria for deliriumprevalent cases. Of patients free of delirium at the time of hospital admission,
5 to 30 percent reported subsequent incidences of delirium during
hospitalization. Delirium occurs in 10 to 15 percent of general surgical
patients, 30 percent of open-heart surgery patients, and more than 50 percent
of patients treated for hip fractures. Delirium occurs in 70 to 87 percent of
intensive care unit patients and up to 83 percent of all patients receiving end
of life care. Sixty percent of patients in nursing homes or post-acute care




<<<PAGE 1198>>>

Medications are the treatments of choice for patients with bipolar disorders.
However, psychotherapies can offer an essential adjunct to treatment.
Somatic Treatments
Pharmacotherapy
GENERAL CLINICAL GUIDELINES. We can divide the pharmacologic treatment of

bipolar disorders into acute and maintenance phases. Bipolar treatment,
however, also involves the formulation of different strategies for the patient
who is experiencing mania or hypomania or depression. Lithium and its
augmentation by antidepressants, antipsychotics, and benzodiazepines have
been the principal approach to the illness. However, three anticonvulsant
mood stabilizers—carbamazepine, valproate, and lamotrigine—are
commonly used options, as well as a series of atypical antipsychotics. Often,
it is necessary to try different medications before finding an optimal
treatment. Furthermore, although one strives for monotherapy, in the case of
bipolar disorder, polypharmacy is common.
Table 6-6
Recommendations for Pharmacologic Treatment of Acute
Mania
First line

Monotherapy: lithium, divalproex, divalproex ER,
olanzapine, risperidone, quetiapine, quetiapine
XR, aripiprazole, ziprasidone, asenapine,
paliperidone ER, cariprazine
Adjunctive therapy with lithium or divalproex:
risperidone, quetiapine, olanzapine,
aripiprazole, asenapine

Second line

Monotherapy: carbamazepine, carbamazepine
ER, ECT, haloperidol
Combination therapy: lithium + divalproex

Third line

Monotherapy: chlorpromazine, clozapine,
tamoxifen




<<<PAGE 1201>>>

skin rash. Evidence for valproate and other anticonvulsants is limited.
Gabapentin and levetiracetam appear to be ineffective.
Antipsychotics. Several of the atypical antipsychotics have shown efficacy
for bipolar depression. Quetiapine has the best evidence. It appears that
quetiapine, in a modest dose (300 mg/day), is sufficient to improve
symptoms. Olanzapine, lurasidone, and cariprazine also have positive studies,
and the FDA approved lurasidone for this indication. Ziprasidone and
aripiprazole do not appear to be effective.
Antidepressants. It remains controversial whether antidepressants are useful
for the depressive phase of bipolar disorder. This is particularly true in
patients with rapid cycling and mixed states. They seem to be less effective
than for major depressive disorder and may induce cycling, mania, or
hypomania. The risk of inducing mania seems highest for tricyclic
antidepressants, monoamine oxidase inhibitors, and perhaps the serotonin
norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors such as venlafaxine. Most experts agree
that antidepressants are not appropriate as monotherapy for patients with
bipolar disorder.
Whether we can use them as adjuncts is also controversial. Some
antidepressants have some evidence of efficacy for adjunctive therapy, such
as fluoxetine. On the whole, the available evidence suggests they may have
some usefulness when combined with a mood stabilizer.




<<<PAGE 1254>>>

to pick a medication in a different class. For example, we might switch from
an SSRI to an SNRI. However, when putting these assumptions to the test, it
is difficult to find any advantage for any particular strategy. For example, in
the landmark STAR*D study, which remains one of the most extensive
studies of treatment strategies following initial failure, although medication
switches were modestly helpful, both switches within and outside a class
were equally effective.
Among augmentation options, several approaches have reasonable
evidence. Several antipsychotics, most notably quetiapine and aripiprazole,
are effective for augmentation. Lithium augmentation is also effective for
augmenting both SSRIs and TCAs. There are also positive studies of thyroid
hormone. However, this strategy is rarely used in clinical practice owing to
the need for ongoing monitoring and potential adverse effects. Several other
agents have been studied, including bupropion, buspirone, lamotrigine,
methylphenidate, and pindolol; however, these have limited placebocontrolled data. One meta-analysis of the available data on switching
strategies concluded that quetiapine and aripiprazole have the best evidence
as augmentation agents. However, we should use these cautiously given their
side effect profile.
NOVEL PHARMACOLOGIC AGENTS

Ketamine. The anesthetic agent ketamine is effective in treatment-resistant
depression. It has a mechanism of action that inhibits the postsynaptic
glutamate-binding protein N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor. Because
abnormalities in glutamatergic signaling seem to have a role in major
depressive disorder, this may account for its efficacy. Until recently,
ketamine was only available intravenously, limiting its use as we had to
monitor patients while they received an infusion of the drug over 30 minutes
in a clinical setting. The most common side effects are dizziness, headache,
and poor coordination, which are transitory. Dissociative symptoms,
including hallucinations, may also occur. A positive response is usually seen
within 24 hours, making this a genuinely novel substance in that it appears to
act much more rapidly than standard antidepressants. However, the effect
seems to be short-lived, and wears off after between 2 and 7 days, again
limiting its use. There are little data on longer-term treatment as well as
concern over associated adverse effects, particularly the psychogenic effect.




<<<PAGE 1306>>>

recommended
MAOIs

Insufficient
evidence

Second line

Second line

RIMA-Moclobemide Insufficient
evidence

Insufficient
evidence

Second Line

Other Psychotropics Second line
—Agomelatine,
Buspirone,
Mirtazapine

Second line

Second line

Benzodiazepines

Second line

Second line

Second line

Atypical
Second line
Antipsychotics—
Quetiapine

Insufficient
evidence

Not
recommended

Anticonvulsant—
Pregabalin

Insufficient
evidence

Second line

Second line

Note: Beta-adrenergic blocking agents are recommended only for performance anxiety.
RIMA, reversible monoamine oxidase inhibitor; GAD, generalized anxiety disorder; PD, panic
disorder; SAD, social anxiety disorder.

In the case of specific phobia, psychotherapies, particularly behavioral
therapies, are the first-line choice. SSRIs may be helpful, although there are
few studies of SSRIs for this disorder.
For agoraphobia, the main goal of pharmacotherapy is to treat the panic
attacks that are usually comorbid. Early studies did not support the use of
medications for “pure” agoraphobia; however, there has been little research
since.
Psychosocial Therapies
There is strong support for a variety of psychosocial therapies for anxiety
disorders, including cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT), behavioral
therapies, and interpersonal therapy. Studies of CBT suggest it has a
substantial effect on generalized anxiety disorder, panic disorder, and social
anxiety disorder, although this evidence is tempered by concerns about




<<<PAGE 1434>>>

medication response is likely to be partial, devising the best “shock-absorber”
system for the patient at a given time. In general, success is more likely if the
target symptoms are present across most or all personality states, rather than
confined to one or a few. Because rapid symptom oscillations are
characteristic in this population, it is not advisable to chase each symptom
shift with a medication change.
The most robust medication treatment effect in this patient population is
the response of nightmares to the α1-adrenergic antagonist prazosin. If the
patient tolerates the blood pressure effects, dosages of prazosin as high as 25
mg daily, in single or twice-daily doses, can be useful. Daytime dosing may
also be effective for control of flashbacks and intrusive symptoms.
Doxazosin, a longer-acting α1-adrenergic antagonist, may also help with
nightmares and intrusive symptoms in PTSD.
Antidepressant medications can reduce depression and stabilize mood. A
variety of PTSD symptoms, especially intrusive and hyperarousal symptoms,
are partially medication responsive. Clinicians report some success with
SSRI, tricyclic, and monoamine oxidase (MAO) antidepressants, β-blockers,
clonidine, anticonvulsants, and benzodiazepines in reducing intrusive
symptoms, hyperarousal, and anxiety in patients with a dissociative identity
disorder. Patients with obsessive-compulsive symptoms may respond to
serotonergic antidepressants. Emerging data suggest that naltrexone may help
ameliorate recurrent self-injurious behaviors in a subset of traumatized
patients.
The atypical neuroleptics, such as risperidone, quetiapine, ziprasidone,
aripiprazole, and olanzapine, may be more effective and better tolerated than
typical neuroleptics for overwhelming anxiety and intrusive PTSD symptoms
in patients with dissociative identity disorder. However, weight gain and
metabolic syndrome may be a particularly problematic side effect for these
nonpsychotic patients. Occasionally, an extremely disorganized,
overwhelmed, chronically ill patient with dissociative identity disorder, who
has not responded to trials of other neuroleptics, responds favorably to a trial
of clozapine.
Electroconvulsive Therapy. For some patients, ECT helps to ameliorate
refractory mood disorders and does not worsen dissociative memory




<<<PAGE 1815>>>

Table 19-12
Pharmacotherapy of
Personality Disorders

Target

Symptom

Domains

of

Choice of Drugs According to Target Symptoms of Personality
Disorders
Target Symptom

Drug/Treatment of
Choice

Not
Recommended

I. Mood Dysregulation and Anxiety
Anxiety
Chronic cognitive

Psychotherapy,
Benzodiazepines
SSRIs, SNRIs,
MAOIs, Low-Dose
Novel
Psychotropics
(aripiprazole,
quetiapine)
Valproate and other
GABA analogs
(clonazepam and
buspirone)

Chronic somatic

MAOIs, SNRIs
(duloxetine,
milnacipran)
Pregabalin and other
GABA analogs,
TCAs, betablockers

Obsessions

SSRIs, Antipsychotics
(quetiapine), TCAs
(clomipramine),
Mild NMDA
antagonists

If used—
benzodiazepines
with long half-life
and short trials
preferred




<<<PAGE 1816>>>

(riluzole,
memantine)
Acute and severe

Mirtazapine, Novel
Psychotropics
(quetiapine,
aripiprazole,
clozapine), TCAs,
clonazepam,
valproates, lithium

Depression
Atypical
MAOIs, SSRIs,
depression/dysphoria
SNRIs,
Classical depression
Aripiprazole,
Lurasidone,
ziprasidone,
quetiapine,
Atypical
antipsychotics (as
monotherapy or
augmentation)

TCAs

Emotional lability/rapid Lithium, Lamotrigine,
cycling
Valproate, Lowerdose
antipsychotics
(olanzapine,
aripiprazole,
clozapine,
ziprasidone)

TCAs
(“catecholamine
stress”),
Standard
antidepressants
(risk of switching
to mania)

II. Behavior Dyscontrol
Aggression/impulsivity
Affective aggression
Lithium, SSRIs,
“Hot temper” with normal
Anticonvulsants,

Benzodiazepines
(disinhibition)




<<<PAGE 1929>>>

risk (1.6 to 1.7 times) of death compared with placebo. All of these agents are
considered first-line drugs for schizophrenia except clozapine, which may
cause adverse hematologic effects that require weekly blood sampling.
Schizophrenia and Schizoaffective Disorder. The SDAs are useful for
treating acute and chronic psychoses such as schizophrenia and
schizoaffective disorder, in both adults and adolescents. SDAs are as good as
or better than typical antipsychotics (DRAs) for the treatment of positive
symptoms in schizophrenia and superior to DRAs for the treatment of
negative symptoms. Compared with persons treated with DRAs, persons
treated with SDAs have fewer relapses and require less frequent
hospitalization, fewer emergency department visits, less phone contact with
mental health professionals, and less treatment in day programs.
Because clozapine has potentially life-threatening adverse effects, it is
appropriate only for patients with schizophrenia who are resistant to all other
antipsychotics. Other indications for clozapine include treatment of persons
with severe tardive dyskinesia—which can be reversed with high dosages in
some cases—and those with a low threshold for EPS. Persons who tolerate
clozapine have done well on long-term therapy. The effectiveness of
clozapine may be increased by augmentation with risperidone, which raises
clozapine concentrations and sometimes results in dramatic clinical
improvement.
Mood Disorders. Most of the SDAs (clozapine being a notable exception)
are FDA approved for the treatment of acute mania. Some of these agents,
including aripiprazole, olanzapine, quetiapine, and quetiapine XR, are also
approved for the maintenance treatment in bipolar disorder as monotherapy
or adjunctive therapy. The SDAs improve depressive symptoms in
schizophrenia, and both clinical experience and clinical trials show that all of
the SDAs augment antidepressants in the acute management of major
depression. At this time, olanzapine, in combination with fluoxetine, has been
approved for treatment-resistant depression, and aripiprazole and quetiapine
XR are indicated for adjunctive therapy to antidepressants in MDDs.
Quetiapine and quetiapine XR are also approved in bipolar depression. A
fixed combination of olanzapine and fluoxetine (Symbyax) is approved as a
treatment for acute bipolar depression.




<<<PAGE 1935>>>

that no blood is visible. It carries a boxed warning for postinjection delirium
sedation syndrome (PDSS). Patients are at risk for severe sedation (including
coma) and must be observed for 3 hours after each injection in a registered
facility. In controlled studies, all patients with PDSS recovered, and there
were no deaths reported. It is postulated that PDSS is secondary to increased
levels of olanzapine secondary to accidental rupture of a blood vessel,
causing extreme sedation or delirium. Patients should be managed as
clinically appropriate and, if necessary, monitored in a facility capable of
resuscitation. The injection can be given every 2 or 4 weeks, depending on
the dosing guidelines.
Drug Interactions. Fluvoxamine (Luvox) and cimetidine (Tagamet)
increase, and carbamazepine and phenytoin decrease, serum concentrations of
olanzapine. Ethanol increases olanzapine absorption by more than 25 percent,
leading to increased sedation. Olanzapine has little effect on the metabolism
of other drugs.
Side Effects. Other than clozapine, olanzapine consistently causes a more
significant amount and more frequent weight gain than other atypicals. This
effect is not dose-related and continues over time. Clinical trial data suggest it
peaks after 9 months, after which it may continue to increase more slowly.
Somnolence, dry mouth, dizziness, constipation, dyspepsia, increased
appetite, akathisia, and tremor are associated with olanzapine use. A small
number of patients (2 percent) may need to discontinue the use of the drug
because of transaminase elevation. There is a dose-related risk of EPS. The
manufacturer recommends a “periodic” assessment of blood sugar and
transaminases during treatment with olanzapine. There is an FDA-mandated
warning about an increased risk of stroke among patients with dementia
treated with SDAs, but this risk is small and is outweighed by improved
behavioral control that treatment may produce.
Quetiapine (Seroquel)
Indications. Quetiapine is indicated for the treatment of schizophrenia. It is
also indicated for the acute treatment of manic episodes associated with
bipolar I disorder, both as monotherapy and as an adjunct to lithium or




<<<PAGE 1936>>>

sodium valproate. It is also indicated as monotherapy for the acute treatment
of depressive episodes associated with bipolar disorder and maintenance
treatment of bipolar I disorder as an adjunct to lithium or divalproex. It also is
indicated as adjunctive therapy to antidepressants for the treatment of MDD.
Pharmacology. Quetiapine is a dibenzothiazepine structurally related to
clozapine, but it differs markedly from that agent in biochemical effects. It is
rapidly absorbed from the GI tract, with peak plasma concentrations reached
in 1 to 2 hours. The steady-state half-life is about 7 hours, and optimal dosing
is two or three times per day. Quetiapine, in addition to being an antagonist
of D2 and 5-HT2, also blocks 5-HT6, D1 and H1, and α1 and α2 receptors. It
does not block muscarinic or benzodiazepine receptors. The receptor
antagonism for quetiapine is generally lower than that for other antipsychotic
drugs, and it is not associated with EPS.
Dosages. Quetiapine is available in 25-, 50-, 100-, 200-, 300-, and 400-mg
tablets. Quetiapine dosing should begin at 25 mg twice daily, with doses then
increased by 25 to 50 mg/dose every 2 to 3 days, up to a target of 300 to 400
mg a day. Studies have shown efficacy in the range of 300 to 800 mg a day.
In reality, more aggressive dosing is both tolerated and more effective. It has
become evident that the target dose can be achieved more rapidly and that
some patients benefit from dosages of as much as 1,200 to 1,600 mg a day.
When used at higher doses, serial ECG studies are required. Despite its short
elimination half-life, quetiapine can be given to many patients once a day.
This dosing is consistent with the observation that quetiapine receptor
occupancy remains even when concentrations in the blood have markedly
declined. Quetiapine in doses of 25 to 300 mg at night has been used for
insomnia.
Other Formulations. Quetiapine XR has comparable bioavailability to an
equivalent dose of quetiapine administered two or three times daily.
Quetiapine XR is given once daily, preferably in the evening, 3 to 4 hours
before bedtime without food or a light meal to prevent an increase in Cmax.
The usual starting dose is 300 mg, and it may be increased to 400 to 800 mg.
Drug Interactions. The potential interactions between quetiapine and other




<<<PAGE 1937>>>

drugs have been well studied. Phenytoin increases quetiapine clearance
fivefold; no significant pharmacokinetic interactions have been noted. Avoid
the use of quetiapine with drugs that increase the QT interval and in patients
with risk factors for prolonged QT interval. The FDA has added a new
warning about quetiapine, cautioning prescribers about potential prolongation
of the QT interval when above-recommended amounts of quetiapine are
combined with specific drugs. Quetiapine should not be combined with other
drugs that are known to prolong QTc. This includes class 1A antiarrhythmics
(e.g., quinidine, procainamide) or class III antiarrhythmics (e.g., amiodarone,
sotalol), antipsychotic medications (e.g., ziprasidone, chlorpromazine,
thioridazine), antibiotics (e.g., gatifloxacin, moxifloxacin), or any other class
of medications known to prolong the QTc interval (e.g., pentamidine,
levomethadyl acetate, methadone). Quetiapine should also be avoided in
circumstances that may increase the risk of occurrence of torsade de pointes
or sudden death, including (1) a history of cardiac arrhythmias such as
bradycardia; (2) hypokalemia or hypomagnesemia; (3) concomitant use of
other drugs that prolong the QTc interval; and (4) presence of congenital
prolongation of the QT interval. Postmarketing cases also show increases in
QT interval in patients who overdose on quetiapine.
Side Effects. Somnolence, postural hypotension, and dizziness are the most
common adverse effects of quetiapine. These are usually transient and are
best managed with initial gradual upward titration of the dosage. Quetiapine
is the SDA least likely to cause EPS, regardless of dose. This makes it
particularly useful in treating patients with Parkinson disease who develop
dopamine agonist-induced psychosis. Prolactin elevation is rare and both
transient and mild when it occurs. Quetiapine is associated with modest
transient weight gain in some persons, but some patients occasionally gain a
considerable amount of weight. The relationship between quetiapine and the
development of diabetes is not as clearly established as are the cases
involving the use of olanzapine. Small increases in heart rate, constipation,
and a transient increase in liver transaminases may also occur. Initial
concerns about cataract formation, based on animal studies, have not been
borne out since the drug has been in clinical use. Nevertheless, it might be
prudent to test for lens abnormalities early in treatment and periodically after
that.




<<<PAGE 1949>>>

of blood glucose, lipids, and body weight is recommended.
Although the transition from a DRA to an SDA may be made abruptly, it is
wiser to taper off the DRA slowly while titrating up the SDA. Clozapine and
olanzapine both have anticholinergic effects, and the transition from one to
the other can usually be accomplished with little risk of cholinergic rebound.
The transition from risperidone to olanzapine is best accomplished by
tapering the risperidone off over 3 weeks while simultaneously beginning
olanzapine at 10 mg a day. Risperidone, quetiapine, and ziprasidone lack
anticholinergic effects, and the abrupt transition from a DRA, olanzapine, or
clozapine to one of these agents may cause cholinergic rebound, which
consists of excessive salivation, nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea. The risk of
cholinergic rebound can be mitigated by initially augmenting risperidone,
quetiapine, or ziprasidone with an anticholinergic drug, which is then tapered
off slowly. Any initiation and termination of SDA use should be
accomplished gradually.
It is wise to overlap the administration of the new drug with the old drug.
Of interest, some people have a more robust clinical response while taking
the two agents during the transition and then regressing on monotherapy with
the newer drug. We know little about the safety of combination antipsychotic
treatment.
Persons receiving regular injections of depot formulations of a DRA who
are to switch to SDA use are given the first dose of the SDA on the day the
next injection is due.
Persons who developed agranulocytosis while taking clozapine can safely
switch to olanzapine use, although initiation of olanzapine use amid
clozapine-induced agranulocytosis can prolong the time of recovery from the
usual 3 to 4 days up to 11 to 12 days. It is prudent to wait for the resolution of
agranulocytosis before initiating olanzapine use. Emergence or recurrence of
agranulocytosis has not been reported with olanzapine, even in persons who
developed it while taking clozapine.
SDA use by pregnant women has not been studied, but consideration
should be given to the potential of risperidone to raise prolactin
concentrations, sometimes up to three to four times the upper limit of the
normal range. Because the drugs can be excreted in breast milk, they should
not be taken by nursing mothers. The dosages for selected SDAs are given in
Table 21-9.




<<<PAGE 2063>>>

The coadministration of lithium and carbamazepine, lamotrigine,
valproate, and clonazepam may increase lithium concentrations and
aggravate lithium-induced neurologic adverse effects. Treatment with the
combination should be initiated at slightly lower dosages than usual, and the
dosages should be increased gradually. Changes from one to another
treatment for mania should be made carefully, with as little temporal overlap
between the drugs as possible.
Most diuretics (e.g., thiazide and potassium-sparing) can increase lithium
concentrations; when treatment with such a diuretic is stopped, the clinician
may need to increase the person’s daily lithium dosage. Osmotic and loop
diuretics, carbonic anhydrase inhibitors, and xanthines (including caffeine)
may reduce lithium concentrations to below therapeutic concentrations.
Whereas ACEIs may cause an increase in lithium concentrations, the AT1
angiotensin II receptor inhibitors losartan (Cozaar) and irbesartan (Avapro)
do not alter lithium concentrations. A wide range of NSAIDs can decrease
lithium clearance, thereby increasing lithium concentrations. These drugs
include indomethacin (Indocin), phenylbutazone (Azolid), diclofenac
(Voltaren), ketoprofen (Orudis), oxyphenbutazone (Oxalid), ibuprofen
(Motrin, Advil), piroxicam (Feldene), and naproxen (Naprosyn). Aspirin and
sulindac (Clinoril) do not affect lithium concentrations.
The coadministration of lithium and quetiapine (Seroquel) may cause
somnolence but is otherwise well tolerated. The coadministration of lithium
and ziprasidone (Geodon) may modestly increase the incidence of tremors.
The coadministration of lithium and calcium channel inhibitors should be
avoided because of potentially fatal neurotoxicity.
A person taking lithium who is about to undergo ECT should discontinue
taking lithium 2 days before beginning ECT to reduce the risk of delirium.
Laboratory Interferences
Lithium does not interfere with any laboratory tests, but lithium-induced
alterations include an increased WBC count, decreased serum thyroxine, and
increased serum calcium. Blood collected in a lithium–heparin anticoagulant
tube will produce falsely elevated lithium concentrations.
Dosage and Clinical Guidelines




<<<PAGE 2252>>>

with schizophrenia. Schizophr Bull. 2008;34(1):60–71.
Leucht S, Cores C, Arbter D, Engel R, Li C, Davis J. Second-generation
versus first-generation antipsychotic drugs for schizophrenia: a metaanalysis. Lancet. 2009;373:31–41.
Leucht S, Komossa K, Rummel-Kluge C, Corves C, Hunger H, Schmid F,
Lobos CA, Schwartz S, Davis JM. A meta-analysis of head-to-head
comparisons of secondgeneration antipsychotics in the treatment of schizophrenia. Am J
Psychiatry. 2009;
166(2):152–163.
Leucht S, Pitschel-Walz G, Abraham D, Kissling W. Efficacy and
extrapyramidal side-effects of the new antipsychotics olanzapine,
quetiapine, risperidone, and sertindole compared to conventional
antipsychotics and placebo. A meta-analysis of randomized controlled
trials. Schizophr Res. 1999;35(1):51–68.
Lieberman JA, Stroup TS, McEvoy JP, Swartz MS, Rosenheck RA. Clinical
Antipsychotic Trials of Intervention Effectiveness (CATIE) investigators.
N Engl J Med. 2005;353:1209.
Mamo D, Graff A, Mizrahi R, Shammi CM, Romeyer F. Differential effects
of aripiprazole on D(2), 5-HT(2), and 5-HT(1A) receptor occupancy in
patients with schizophrenia: a triple tracer PET study. Am J Psychiatry.
2007;164(9):1411–1417.
Marder SR, Essock SM, Miller AL, Buchanan RW, Davis JM. The Mount
Sinai conference on the pharmacotherapy of schizophrenia. Schizophr Bull.
2002;28(1):5.
Marder SR, Hurford IM, van Kammen DP. Second-generation
antipsychotics. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan &
Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Vol. 2.
Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:3206.
McEvoy JP, Lieberman JA, Perkins DO, Hamer RM, Gu H. Efficacy and
tolerability of olanzapine, quetiapine, and risperidone in the treatment of
early psychosis: a randomized, double-blind 52-week comparison. Am J
Psychiatry. 2007;164(7):
1050–1060.
McEvoy JP, Lieberman JA, Stroup TS. Effectiveness of clozapine versus
olanzapine, quetiapine, and risperidone in patients with chronic




<<<PAGE 3137>>>

Benzodiazepines Increased beta activity
Clozapine
(Clozaril)

Nonspecific change

Olanzapine
(Zyprexa)

Nonspecific change

Risperidone
(Risperdal)

Nonspecific change

Quetiapine
(Seroquel)

No significant changes

Aripiprazole
(Abilify)

No significant changes

Lithium

Slowing or paroxysmal activity

Alcohol

Decreased alpha activity; increased theta activity

Opioids

Decreased alpha activity; increased voltage of
theta and delta waves; in overdose, slow waves

Barbiturates

Increased beta activity; in withdrawal states,
generalized paroxysmal activity and spike
discharges

Marijuana

Increased alpha activity in frontal area of brain;
overall slow alpha activity

Cocaine

Similar to marijuana

Inhalants

Diffuse slowing of delta and theta waves

Nicotine

Increased alpha activity; in withdrawal, marked
decrease in alpha activity

Caffeine

In withdrawal, increase in amplitude or voltage of
theta activity

Topographic Quantitative Electroencephalography (QEEG)




<<<PAGE 3738>>>

Seasonality, 1003–1004
Seclusion and restraint, 841
indications and contraindications for, 841t
restrictions for, 841t
Secobarbital, 298
Secondary autonomous ego functions, 1065
Secondary prevention, 868
Secondary revision, 1059
Second-generation antidepressants, 591
Second-generation or atypical antipsychotic (SGA) drugs, 594, 608
adverse effects, 609
aripiprazole (Abilify), 612–613
asenapine (Saphris), 613
clinical guidelines, 615
clozapine (Clozaril), 613–614
dosing, 616t
drugs approved by FDA, 608
lumateperone (Caplyta), 615
lurasidone (Latuda), 614–615
mechanisms of action, 608–609
for mood disorders, 609
olanzapine (Zyprexa), 610–611
paliperidone (Invega), 610
quetiapine (Seroquel), 611–612
risk of extrapyramidal side effects (EPS), 608
risperidone (Risperdal), 609–610
for schizophrenia and schizoaffective disorder, 609
therapeutic indications, 609
ziprasidone (Geodon), 612
Second individuation, 906
Sedating drugs, 602
Sedative-, hypnotic-, anxiolytic-related disorders, 298–302
abuse, patterns of
intravenous use, 299
oral use, 298–299
clinical features
barbiturate-like substances, 298


