<<<PAGE 776>>>

They may also benefit from assistance in grieving and accepting the extent of
their disability and from attention to self-esteem issues. We should try to
maximize any areas of intact functioning by helping patients identify
activities in which successful functioning is possible. A psychodynamic
assessment of defective functions and cognitive limitations can also be
useful. Clinicians can help patients find ways to deal with the defective
functions, such as keeping calendars for orientation problems, making
schedules to help structure activities, and taking notes for memory problems.
Psychodynamic interventions with family members of patients with
dementia may be of great assistance. Those who take care of a patient
struggle with feelings of guilt, grief, anger, and exhaustion as they watch a
family member gradually deteriorate. A common problem that develops
among caregivers involves their self-sacrifice in caring for a patient. They
often suppress any developing resentment from this self-sacrifice because of
the guilt feelings it produces. Clinicians can help caregivers understand the
complex mixture of feelings associated with seeing a loved one decline and
can provide understanding as well as permission to express these feelings.
Clinicians must also be aware of the caregivers’ tendencies to blame
themselves or others for patients’ illnesses and must appreciate the role that
patients with dementia play in the lives of family members.
Pharmacotherapy
Clinicians may prescribe sedative-hypnotics for insomnia and anxiety,
antidepressants for depression, and antipsychotic drugs for delusions and
hallucinations, but they should be aware of the possible adverse drug effects
that may be worse in older people (e.g., disinhibition, confusion, and
oversedation). In general, we should avoid drugs with high anticholinergic
activity.
Donepezil, rivastigmine, galantamine, and tacrine are cholinesterase
inhibitors used to treat mild to moderate cognitive impairment in Alzheimer
disease. They reduce the inactivation of the neurotransmitter acetylcholine
and thus potentiate the cholinergic neurotransmitter, which in turn produces a
modest improvement in memory and goal-directed thought. These drugs are
most useful for persons with mild to moderate memory loss who have
sufficient preservation of their basal forebrain cholinergic neurons to benefit




<<<PAGE 777>>>

from augmentation of cholinergic neurotransmission.
Donepezil is well tolerated and widely used. We rarely use tacrine because
of its potential for hepatotoxicity. Fewer clinical data are available for
rivastigmine and galantamine, which appear more likely to cause
gastrointestinal (GI) and neuropsychiatric adverse effects than does
donepezil. None of these medications prevent the progressive neuronal
degeneration of the disorder.
Memantine protects neurons from excessive amounts of glutamate, which
may be neurotoxic. Sometimes we may combine the drug with donepezil. It
appears to improve dementia sometimes.
Other Treatment Approaches. There are many drugs under development
for cognitive-enhancing activity and this is a very active area of drug
research. Novel strategies are focusing on the β-amyloid plaques and
neurofibrillary tangles associated with Alzheimer and some other
neurodegenerative disorders. In the case of amyloid plaques, attempts to
reduce their formation, aggregation and to increase their clearance are
underway, and several monoclonal and polyclonal antibody vaccines are
being tested.
Estrogen replacement therapy may reduce the risk of cognitive decline in
postmenopausal women. However the data is correlational and clinical trials
to date are largely disappointing. A variety of other interventions have been
proposed to improve cognitive outcomes in dementia, including cognitive
stimulation, music therapy, reminiscence therapy, omega 3 fish oil, statins,
ginkgo biloba, aromatherapy, or nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs;
however, all lack sufficient evidence to make any recommendation. Exercise
improves cognition in healthy adults, and there is some evidence of benefit in
dementia, particularly in the early stages.

EPIDEMIOLOGY
With the aging population, the prevalence of dementia is rising. The
prevalence of moderate to severe dementia in different population groups is
approximately 5 percent in the general population older than 65 years of age,
20 to 40 percent in the general population older than 85 years of age, 15 to 20
percent in outpatient general medical practices, and 50 percent in chronic care




<<<PAGE 866>>>

J Neuropsychiatry Clin Neurosci. 2010;22(1):100–104.
Simioni S, Cavassini M, Annoni JM, Abraham AR, Bourquin I, Schiffer V,
Calmy A, Chave JP, Giacobini E, Hirschel B, Du Pasquier RA. Cognitive
dysfunction in HIV patients despite long-standing suppression of viremia.
AIDS. 2010;24(9):1243–1250.
Mild Cognitive Impairment
Aggarwal NT, Wilson RS, Beck TL, Bienias JL, Berry-Kravis E, Bennett
DA. The apolipoprotein E epsilon4 allele and incident Alzheimer’s disease
in persons with mild cognitive impairment. Neurocase. 2005;11(1):3–7.
Andreescu C, Aizenstein HJ. Amnestic disorders and mild cognitive
impairment. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s
Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:1198.
Birks J, Flicker L. Donepezil for mild cognitive impairment. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev. 2006;(3):CD006104.
Breitner JCS. Mild cognitive impairment and progression to dementia: New
findings. Neurology. 2014;82(4):e34–e35.
Doody RS, Ferris SH, Salloway S, Meuser TM, Murthy AK, Li C, Goldman
R: Identifying amnestic mild cognitive impairment in primary care: A
feasibility study. Clin Drug Investig. 2011;31(7):483–491.
Edwards ER, Spira AP, Barnes DE, Yaffe K. Neuropsychiatric symptoms in
mild cognitive impairment: Differences by subtype and progression to
dementia. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2009;24(7):716–722.
Gallagher D, Coen R, Kilroy D, Belinski K, Bruce I, Coakley D, Walsh B,
Cunningham C, Lawlor BA. Anxiety and behavioural disturbance as
markers of prodromal Alzheimer’s disease in patients with mild cognitive
impairment. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2011;26(2):166–172.
Goldberg TE, Koppel J, Keehlisen L, Christen E, Dreses-Werringloer U,
Conejero-Goldberg C, Gordon ML, Davies P. Performance-based
measures of everyday function in mild cognitive impairment. Am J
Psychiatry. 2010;167(7):845–853.
Hendrix SB, Welsh-Bohmer KA. Separation of cognitive domains to improve
prediction of progression from mild cognitive impairment to Alzheimer’s
disease. Alzheimers Res Ther. 2013;5(3):22.
Mecocci P, Polidori MC, Praticó D. Antioxidant clinical trials in mild




<<<PAGE 1144>>>

raising the dose may be helpful. If the level is relatively high, clinicians
should consider whether side effects may be interfering with therapeutic
response.
If the patient is responding poorly, one may increase the dose above the
usual therapeutic level; however, higher than recommended doses usually do
not improve response. Changing to another drug is preferable.
As discussed earlier, clozapine is useful for patients who respond poorly to
other antipsychotics. Double-blind studies comparing clozapine with other
antipsychotics indicated that clozapine had the most evident advantage over
conventional drugs in patients with the most severe psychotic symptoms, as
well as in those who had previously responded poorly to other antipsychotics.
Researchers and clinicians have tried several adjunctive medications, most
with mixed success. These include lamotrigine, mirtazapine, donepezil, Dalanine, D-serine, estradiol, memantine, and allopurinol.
Other Somatic Treatments
Researchers have studied electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) in both acute and
chronic schizophrenia. Studies in recent-onset patients indicate that ECT is
about as effective as antipsychotic medications and more effective than
psychotherapy. Other studies suggest that supplementing antipsychotic
medications with ECT is more effective than antipsychotic medications
alone. Antipsychotic medications should be administered during and after
ECT treatment.
Some initial studies have suggested neuromodulation, using transcranial
magnetic stimulation (TMS) or transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS),
may be useful for treating hallucinations or negative symptoms.
Although we no longer consider psychosurgery to be appropriate
treatment, some research centers practice it on a limited experimental basis
for severe, intractable cases.
Psychosocial Therapy
Psychotherapy is considered an essential part of treatment for schizophrenia,
and patients who receive psychotherapy along with medications tend to have
better adherence to therapy, less negative symptoms, and better overall
functioning.




<<<PAGE 1817>>>

EEG

Low-dose
antipsychotics

Predatory aggression
(cold blooded
revenge/cruelty)

No Effective
Pharmacologic Tx

Benzodiazepines
(disinhibition)

Organic-like aggression
(traumatic brain
injury)

Beta-Blockers,
Valproates,
Quetiapine,
Carbamazepine
(CBMZ), TCAs,
cholinesterase
inhibitors
(donepezil)

Benzodiazepines
(disinhibition,
delirium)

Ictal aggression
(abnormal EEG)

CBMZ,
TCAs, Low-potency
Diphenylhydantoin,
typical
Valproate
antipsychotics
Benzodiazepines
(both increase
(clonazepam)
risk of seizures)

III. Social and Emotional Detachment
Chronic asociality and disinterest
Blunted affect

Low-Dose
Antipsychotics
(aripiprazole,
olanzapine, lowdose clozapine,
sulpiride)

IV. Cognitive-Perceptual Distortions/Psychotic Symptoms
Acute and brief
psychotic episodes

Novel Antipsychotics
(Risperdal,
olanzapine)
Typical neuroleptics
(for the duration of




<<<PAGE 2196>>>

therapy trial.
3. In monotherapy trials, clinically relevant improvements were observed
beginning at doses in the range 0.05 to 0.08 mg/kg once daily. Efficacy
increased with increasing weight-adjusted dose (mg/kg). If well
tolerated, doses up to 0.12 mg/kg once daily may provide additional
benefit. Doses above 4 mg/day have not been systematically studied in
controlled clinical trials.
4. In the adjunctive trial, the majority of subjects reached optimal doses in
the 0.05 to 0.12 mg/kg/day range.
In clinical trials, there were dose-related and exposure-related risks for
several clinically significant adverse reactions (e.g., hypotension,
bradycardia, sedative events). Thus, consideration should be given to dosing
an extended-release preparation of guanfacine on a milligram-per-kilogram
basis in order to balance the exposure-related potential benefits and risks of
treatment.

21.8 Drugs Used for Cognitive
Enhancement
CHOLINESTERASE INHIBITORS
Donepezil (Aricept), rivastigmine (Exelon), and galantamine (Reminyl) are
cholinesterase inhibitors used to treat mild to moderate cognitive impairment
in dementia of the Alzheimer type. They reduce the inactivation of the
neurotransmitter acetylcholine and, thus, potentiate cholinergic
neurotransmission, which in turn produces a modest improvement in memory
and goal-directed thought. Memantine (Namenda) is not a cholinesterase
inhibitor, producing its effects through blockade of NMDA receptors. Unlike
the cholinesterase inhibitors, which are indicated for the mild to moderate
stages of Alzheimer disease, memantine is indicated for the moderate to
severe stages of the disease. Tacrine (Cognex), the first cholinesterase
inhibitor to be introduced, is no longer used because of its multiple-daily
dosing regimens, its potential for hepatotoxicity, and the consequent need for




<<<PAGE 2197>>>

frequent laboratory monitoring. Clinicians often combine a cholinesterase
inhibitor with memantine, as this combination may provide a beneficial
response compared with only cholinesterase inhibitor pharmacotherapy.
Pharmacologic Actions
Donepezil is entirely absorbed from the GI tract. Peak plasma concentrations
are reached about 3 to 4 hours after oral dosing. The half-life of donepezil is
70 hours in elderly persons, and it is taken only once daily. Steady-state
levels are achieved within about 2 weeks. The presence of stable alcoholic
cirrhosis reduces the clearance of donepezil by 20 percent. Rivastigmine
(Exelon) is rapidly and completely absorbed from the GI tract and reaches
peak plasma concentrations in 1 hour, but this is delayed by up to 90 minutes
if rivastigmine is taken with food. The half-life of rivastigmine is 1 hour, but
because it remains bound to cholinesterases, a single dose is therapeutically
active for 10 hours, and it is taken twice daily. Galantamine (Reminyl) is an
alkaloid similar to codeine and is extracted from daffodils of the plant
Galanthus nivalis. It is readily absorbed, with maximum concentrations
reached after 30 minutes to 2 hours. Food decreases the maximum
concentration by 25 percent. The elimination half-life of galantamine is
approximately 6 hours.
Tacrine (Cognex) is absorbed rapidly from the GI tract. Peak plasma
concentrations are reached about 90 minutes after oral dosing. The half-life of
tacrine is about 2 to 4 hours, thereby necessitating four-times-daily dosing.
Cholinesterase inhibitors are reversible, nonacylating inhibitors of either
acetylcholinesterase or butyrylcholinesterase, the enzymes that catabolize
choline-based esthers in the CNS. The enzyme inhibition increases synaptic
concentrations of acetylcholine, especially in the hippocampus and cerebral
cortex. Unlike tacrine, which is nonselective for all forms of
acetylcholinesterase, donepezil appears to be selectively active within the
CNS and has little activity in the periphery. Donepezil’s favorable side effect
profile appears to correlate with its lack of inhibition of cholinesterases in the
GI tract. Rivastigmine appears to have somewhat more peripheral activity
than donepezil and is thus more likely to cause GI adverse effects than is
donepezil.




<<<PAGE 2198>>>

Therapeutic Indications
Cholinesterase inhibitors are effective for the treatment of mild to moderate
cognitive impairment in dementia of the Alzheimer type. In long-term use,
they slow the progression of memory loss and diminish apathy, depression,
hallucinations, anxiety, euphoria, and purposeless motor behaviors.
Functional autonomy is less well preserved. Some persons note an immediate
improvement in memory, mood, psychotic symptoms, and interpersonal
skills. Others note little initial benefit but can retain their cognitive and
adaptive faculties at a relatively stable level for many months. A practical
benefit of cholinesterase inhibitor use is a delay or reduction of the need for
nursing home placement.
Donepezil and rivastigmine may be beneficial for patients with Parkinson
disease and Lewy body disease and treatment of cognitive deficits caused by
traumatic brain injury. Donepezil is under study for the treatment of mild
cognitive impairment that is less severe than that caused by Alzheimer
disease. People with vascular dementia may respond to acetylcholinesterase
inhibitors. Occasionally, cholinesterase inhibitors elicit an idiosyncratic
catastrophic reaction, with signs of grief and agitation, which is self-limited
after the drug is discontinued. The use of cholinesterase inhibitors to improve
cognition by nondemented individuals should be discouraged.
Precautions and Adverse Reactions
Donepezil. Donepezil is generally well tolerated at recommended dosages.
Fewer than 3 percent of those taking donepezil experience nausea, diarrhea,
and vomiting. These mild symptoms are more frequent with a 10-mg dose
than with a 5-mg dose, and when present, they tend to resolve after 3 weeks
of continued use. Donepezil may cause weight loss. Donepezil treatment has
been infrequently associated with bradyarrhythmias, especially in those with
underlying cardiac disease. A small number of persons experience syncope.
Rivastigmine. Rivastigmine is generally well tolerated but recommended
dosages may need to be scaled back in the initial period of treatment to limit
GI and CNS adverse effects. These mild symptoms are more common at
dosages above 6 mg a day, and when present, they tend to resolve after the
dosage is lowered. The most common adverse effects associated with




<<<PAGE 2200>>>

Table 21-56
Incidence of Major Adverse
Cholinesterase Inhibitors (%)

Side

Effects

with

Table 21-56 summarizes the incidence of significant adverse side effects
associated with each of the cholinesterase inhibitors.
Drug Interactions. All cholinesterase inhibitors should be used cautiously
with drugs that also possess cholinomimetic activity. Such drugs include
succinylcholine (Anectine) and bethanechol (Urecholine). The
coadministration of cholinesterase inhibitors and drugs that have cholinergic
antagonist activity (e.g., tricyclic drugs) is probably counterproductive.
Paroxetine is the most anticholinergic of the SSRIs, and we avoid it in
patients taking cholinesterase inhibitors.
Donepezil undergoes extensive metabolism via both CYP2D6 and 3A4
isozymes. The metabolism of donepezil may be increased by phenytoin
(Dilantin), carbamazepine (Tegretol), dexamethasone (Decadron), rifampin
(Rifadin), and phenobarbital (Solfoton). Commonly used agents such as
paroxetine, ketoconazole (Nizoral), and erythromycin can significantly
increase donepezil concentrations. Donepezil is highly protein-bound, but it
does not displace other protein-bound drugs, such as furosemide (Lasix),
digoxin (Lanoxin), or warfarin (Coumadin). Rivastigmine circulates mostly
unbound to serum proteins and has no significant drug interactions.
Similar to donepezil, galantamine is metabolized by both CYP2D6 and
3A4 isozymes and thus may interact with drugs that inhibit these pathways.
Paroxetine and ketoconazole should be used with great caution.
Laboratory Interferences. No laboratory interferences have been
associated with the use of cholinesterase inhibitors.




<<<PAGE 2201>>>

Dosage and Clinical Guidelines. Before initiation of cholinesterase
inhibitor therapy, potentially treatable causes of dementia should be ruled
out, and the diagnosis of dementia of the Alzheimer type established.
Donepezil is available in 5- and 10-mg tablets. Treatment should be
initiated at 5 mg each night. If well tolerated and of some discernible benefit
after 4 weeks, the dosage should be increased to a maintenance dosage of 10mg each night. Donepezil absorption is unaffected by meals.
Rivastigmine is available in 1.5-, 3-, 4.5-, and 6-mg capsules. The
recommended initial dosage is 1.5 mg twice daily for a minimum of 2 weeks,
after which increases of 1.5 mg a day can be made at intervals of at least 2
weeks to a target dosage of 6 mg a day, taken in two equal dosages. If
tolerated, the dosage may be further titrated upward to a maximum of 6 mg
twice daily. The administration of rivastigmine with food can reduce the risk
of adverse GI events.
Galantamine is available in 4-, 8-, and 16-mg tablets. The suggested dose
range is 16 to 32 mg/day given twice a day. The higher dose is better
tolerated than lower doses. The initial dosage is 8 mg/day, and after a
minimum of 4 weeks, the dose can be raised. All subsequent dosage increases
should occur at 4-week intervals and should be based on tolerability.
Tacrine is available in 10-, 20-, 30-, and 40-mg capsules. Before the
initiation of tacrine treatment, a complete physical and laboratory
examination should be conducted, with particular attention to liver function
tests and baseline hematologic indexes. Treatment should be initiated at 10
mg four times a day and then raised by increments of 10 mg a dose every 6
weeks up to 160 mg a day; the person’s tolerance of each dosage is indicated
by the absence of unacceptable side effects and lack of elevation of ALT
activity. Tacrine should be given four times daily—ideally 1 hour before
meals because the absorption of tacrine is reduced by about 25 percent when
it is taken during the first 2 hours after meals. If tacrine is used, the specific
guidelines for tacrine-induced ALT listed above should be followed.

MEMANTINE
Pharmacologic Actions
Memantine is well absorbed after oral administration. It reaches peak




<<<PAGE 2278>>>

a major active metabolite of buspirone: assessment of pharmacokinetics
and 5-hydroxytryptamine 1A receptor occupancy in rats. Drug Metab
Dispos. 2007;35(8):1387–1392.
Drugs Used to Treat Sleep Disorders
Bannan N, Rooney S, O’Connor J. Zopiclone misuse: an update from Dublin.
Drug Alcohol Rev. 2007;26:83–85.
Boehlein JK, Kinzie JD. Pharmacologic reduction of CNS noradrenergic
activity in PTSD: the case for clonidine and prazosin. J Psychiatr Pract.
2007;13:72–78.
Calvo JR, Gonzalez-Yanes C, Maldonado M. The role of melatonin in the
cells of the innate immunity: a review. J Pineal Res. 2013;55(2):103–120.
DeMicco M, Wang-Weigand S, Zhang J. Long-term therapeutic effects of
ramelteon treatment in adults with chronic insomnia: a 1-year study. Sleep.
2006;
29(Suppl):A234.
Doghramji K. Melatonin and its receptors: a new class of sleep-promoting
agents. J Clin Sleep Med. 2007;3(5 Suppl):S17.
Erman M, Seiden D, Zammit G, Sainati S, Zhang J. An efficacy, safety, and
dose-response study of ramelteon in patients with chronic primary
insomnia. Sleep Med. 2006;7(1):17–24.
Johnson MW, Suess PE, Griffiths RR. Ramelteon: a novel hypnotic lacking
abuse liability and sedative adverse effects. Arch Gen Psychiatry.
2006;63(10):
1149–1157.
Karim A, Bradford D, Siebert F, Zhao Z. Pharmacokinetic effect of multiple
oral doses of donepezil on ramelteon, and vice versa, in healthy adults.
Sleep. 2007;
30(Suppl):A244.
Kato K, Hirai K, Nishiyama K, Uchikawa O, Fukatsu K. Neurochemical
properties of ramelteon (TAK-375), a selective MT1/MT2 receptor agonist.
Neuropharmacology. 2005;48(2):301–310.
Lemmer B. The sleep–wake cycle and sleeping pills. Physiol Behav.
2009;90:285.
Lieberman JA. Update on the safety considerations in the management of
insomnia with hypnotics: incorporating modified-release formulations into




<<<PAGE 2287>>>

2006;26(Suppl 1):S37.
Weiss RD, O’malley SS, Hosking JD, Locastro JS, Swift R, COMBINE
Study Research Group. Do patients with alcohol dependence respond to
placebo? Results from the COMBINE Study. J Stud Alcohol Drugs.
2008;69(6):878.
Zarkin GA, Bray JW, Aldridge A, Mitra D, Mills MJ, Couper DJ, Cisler RA,
COMBINE Cost-Effectiveness Research Group. Cost and costeffectiveness of the COMBINE study in alcohol-dependent patients. Arch
Gen Psychiatry. 2008;65(10):1214–1221.
Drugs Used for Cognitive Enhancement
Auchus AP, Brasher HR, Salloway S, Korczyn AD, DeDeyn PP.
Galantamine treatment of vascular dementia: a randomized trial.
Neurology. 2007;69:448.
Black SE, Doody R, Li H, McRae T, Jambor KM. Donepezil preserves
cognition and global function in patients with severe Alzheimer’s disease.
Neurology. 2007;
69:459.
Cummings J, Lefevre G, Small G, Appel-Dingemanse S. Pharmacokinetic
rationale for rivastigmine patch. Neurology. 2007;69(4 Suppl 1):S10.
Droogsma E, Veeger N, van Walderveen P, Niemarkt S, van Asselt D. Effect
of treatment gaps in elderly patients with dementia treated with
cholinesterase inhibitors. Neurology. 2013;80(17):1622.
Edwards K, Royall D, Hershey L, Lichter D, Ake A. Efficacy and safety of
galantamine in patients with dementia with Lewy body: a 24-week openlabel study. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord. 2007;23:401.
Jann MW, Small GW. Cholinesterase inhibitors. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA,
Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry.
9th ed. Vol. 2. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins;
2009:3089.
Porsteinsson AP, Grossberg GT, Mintzer J, Memantine MEM MD 12 Study
Group. Memantine treatment in patients with mild to moderate
Alzheimer’s disease already receiving a cholinesterase inhibitor: a
randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Curr Alzheimer Res.
2008;5:83–89.
Qassem A, Snow V, Cross JT Jr, Forcicea MA, Hopkins R Jr, Shekelle P,




<<<PAGE 2288>>>

Adelman A, Mehr D, Schellhase K, Campos-Outcalt D, Santagoida P,
Owens DK. Current pharmacologic treatment of dementia: a clinical
practice guideline from the American College of Physicians and the
American Academy of Family Physicians. Ann Intern Med. 2008;148:370–
378.
Reisberg B, Doody R, Stoffer A, Schmidt F, Ferris S. A 24-week open label
extension study on memantine in moderate to severe Alzheimer’s disease.
Arch Neurol. 2006;63:49.
Ritchie C, Zhinchin G. Low dose, high dose, or no dose: better prescribing of
cholinesterase inhibitors for Alzheimer’s disease. Int Psychogeriatr.
2013;25(4):511–515.
Seltzer B. Donepezil: an update. Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2007;8:1011–
1023.
Wagle KC, Rowan PJ, Poon O-YI, Kunik ME, Taffet GE, Braun UK.
Initiation of cholinesterase inhibitors in an inpatient setting. Am J
Alzheimer Dis Other Demen. 2013;28(4):377–383.
Drugs Used to Treat Sexual Disorders
Chivers ML, Rosen RC. Phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitors and female
sexual response: faulty protocols or paradigms? J Sex Med. 2010;7(2 Pt
2):858–872.
Claes HI, Goldstein I, Althof SE, Berner MM, Cappelleri JC, Bushmakin
AG, Symonds T, Schnetzler G. Understanding the effects of sildenafil
treatment on erection maintenance and erection hardness. J Sex Med.
2010;7(6):2184–2191.
Hatzimouratidis K, Burnett AL, Hatzichristou D, McCullough AR, Montorsi
F, Mulhall JP. Phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitors in postprostatectomy
erectile dysfunction: a critical analysis of the basic science rationale and
clinical application. Eur Urol. 2009;55(2):334–347.
Hosain G, Latini DM, Kauth M, Goltz HH, Helmer DA. Sexual dysfunction
among male veterans returning from Iraq and Afghanistan: prevalence and
correlates. J Sex Med. 2013;10(2):516–523.
Khan AS, Sheikh Z, Khan S, Dwivedi R, Benjamin E. Viagra deafness—
Sensorineural hearing loss and phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitors.
Laryngoscope. 2011;121(5):
1049–1054.




<<<PAGE 3642>>>

dissociative identity disorder, 440–444, 442t. See also Dissociative
identity disorder
dissociative trance, 444, 448
Distortions, 114. See also Speech sound disorder
Disulfiram, 693–694
in alcohol use disorder treatment, 283, 284t
for cocaine use disorder, 307
Ditropan. See Oxybutynin
Diupres. See Reserpine
Divorce, 587, 589, 912
community, 912
coparental, 912
economic, 912
effects on children, 897, 897t
legal, 912
psychic, 912
reasons for, 912–913
Dlx genes, 940, 944
DOB (2,5-dimethoxy-4-bromoamphetamine), 303
Docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), 977
Doctrine of parens patriae, 839
Domestic violence, 584
Dominic-R, 77, 78
Donepezil, 697
Do-not-intubate (DNI) order, 858
Do-not-resuscitate (DNR) order, 858
L-Dopa, 705–706
Dopamine
function of, 955
metabolites of, 958
mood disorders and, 350
secretion, 955
sexual behavior and, 567–568
transporters, 959
Dopamine agonists, 704–705
dosage and clinical guidelines, 706, 706t
drug interactions, 706


