<<<PAGE 847>>>

Mercury. Either inorganic or organic mercury can cause mercury poisoning.
Inorganic mercury poisoning results in the “mad hatter” syndrome
(previously seen in workers in the hat industry who softened mercurycontaining felt by putting it in their mouths), with depression, irritability, and
psychosis. Associated neurologic symptoms are headache, tremor, and
weakness. Contaminated fish or grain can cause organic mercury poisoning
and result in depression, irritability, and cognitive impairment. Associated
symptoms are sensory neuropathies, cerebellar ataxia, dysarthria,
paresthesias, and visual field defects. Mercury poisoning in pregnant women
causes abnormal fetal development. No specific therapy is available, although
chelation therapy with dimercaprol may help with acute poisoning.
Lead. Lead poisoning occurs when the amount of lead ingested exceeds the
body’s ability to eliminate it. It takes several months for toxic symptoms to
appear.
The signs and symptoms of lead poisoning depend on the level of lead in
the blood. When lead reaches levels above 200 mg/L, symptoms of severe
lead encephalopathy occur, with dizziness, clumsiness, ataxia, irritability,
restlessness, headache, and insomnia. Later, an excited delirium occurs, with
associated vomiting and visual disturbances, and progresses to convulsions,
lethargy, and coma.
Treatment of lead encephalopathy should be instituted as rapidly as
possible, even without laboratory confirmation, because of the high mortality
rate. The treatment of choice to facilitate lead excretion is intravenous
administration of calcium disodium edetate (calcium disodium versenate)
daily for 5 days.
Manganese. Early manganese poisoning (sometimes called manganese
madness) causes symptoms of headache, irritability, joint pains, and
somnolence. An eventual picture appears of emotional lability, pathologic
laughter, nightmares, hallucinations, and compulsive and impulsive acts
associated with periods of confusion and aggressiveness. Lesions involving
the basal ganglia and pyramidal system result in gait impairment, rigidity,
monotonous or whispering speech, tremors of the extremities and tongue,
masked facies (manganese mask), micrographia, dystonia, dysarthria, and
loss of equilibrium. The psychological effects tend to clear 3 or 4 months




<<<PAGE 908>>>

Seizures. Seizures can occur suddenly and without other signs of
withdrawal. About 1 percent of patients may have a single grand mal
convulsion; the rare person has multiple fits, with the peak incidence on the
second day of withdrawal.
Such patients require neurologic evaluation to rule out an independent
seizure disorder. Assuming no other cause for the seizures is found,
benzodiazepines are the treatment of choice for managing alcohol-related
seizures. Anticonvulsants, although often used (particularly before the cause
of the seizure is known), do not appear to offer additional benefit.
Mild or Moderate Withdrawal. Withdrawal develops because the brain
has physically adapted to the presence of a brain depressant and cannot
function adequately in the absence of the drug. Giving sufficient brain
depressant on the first day to diminish symptoms and then weaning the
patient off the drug over the next 5 days offers most patients optimal relief. It
also minimizes the possibility that severe withdrawal will develop. Any CNS
depressant (including benzodiazepines, barbiturates, or even alcohol) can
work, but most clinicians choose a benzodiazepine for its relative safety.
Many studies have found that benzodiazepines control most of the symptoms
associated with alcohol withdrawal. We can give adequate treatment with
either short-acting drugs (e.g., lorazepam), or long-acting substances (e.g.,
chlordiazepoxide and diazepam). We may choose to give benzodiazepines
orally or parenterally; however, we should not give intramuscular (IM)
diazepam or chlordiazepoxide as their IM absorption is erratic. We should
titrate the dosage of the benzodiazepine, starting with a high dosage and
lowering the dosage as the patient recovers. We should aim to give sufficient
benzodiazepines to keep patients calm and sedated but not so sedated that we
cannot arouse them for procedures and examinations.
Although benzodiazepines are the standard treatment for alcohol
withdrawal, studies have shown that carbamazepine in daily doses of 800 mg
is as effective as benzodiazepines and has the added benefit of minimal abuse
liability. Carbamazepine use is gradually becoming common in the United
States and Europe.
Table 4-12 gives an example of withdrawal treatment using
chlordiazepoxide. When giving a long-acting agent, such as
chlordiazepoxide, the clinician must avoid producing excessive sleepiness




<<<PAGE 909>>>

through overmedication; if the patient is sleepy, it is best to omit the next
scheduled dose. When taking a short-acting drug, such as lorazepam, the
patient must not miss any dose because rapid changes in benzodiazepine
concentrations in the blood can precipitate severe withdrawal.
A social model program of detoxification saves money by avoiding
medications while using social supports. This less-expensive regimen can be
helpful for mild or moderate withdrawal syndromes. Some clinicians also use
β-adrenergic receptor antagonists (e.g., propranolol) or α-adrenergic receptor
agonists (e.g., clonidine) to block the symptoms of sympathetic hyperactivity.
However, these medications do not appear to be superior to benzodiazepines.
Unlike the brain depressants, these other agents are not effective treatments
for seizures or delirium.
Table 4-12
An Example Treatment for Alcohol Withdrawal
Day 1: chlordiazepoxide 25 mg by mouth 3–4 times daily, hold if
sedated
1–2 additional doses if
The patient is jittery
Has increased tremor
Has autonomic dysfunction
Day 2: give the total dose used on day 1 minus 20% divided across
3–4 doses
Following days: continue a 20% decrease until no further medication
is needed (4–5 days)
Severe Withdrawal. For the approximately 1 percent of alcoholic patients
with extreme autonomic dysfunction, agitation, and confusion—that is, those
with alcohol withdrawal delirium, or DTs—no optimal treatment has yet been
developed. The best treatment for DTs is prevention. When that is not
possible, the first step is to ask why such a severe and relatively uncommon
withdrawal syndrome has occurred. The answer often relates to a severe
concomitant medical problem that needs immediate treatment.
Once a delirium appears, the treatment remains similar to that for the
standard withdrawal but with higher doses. Example regimens are 50 to 100




<<<PAGE 910>>>

mg of chlordiazepoxide given every 4 hours orally, or lorazepam, given
intravenously (IV) if oral medication is not possible. A high-calorie, highcarbohydrate diet supplemented by multivitamins is also essential.
Physically restraining patients with the DTs is risky; they may fight against
the restraints to a dangerous level of exhaustion. When patients are disorderly
and uncontrollable, it may be preferable to use a seclusion room. Adjunctive
antipsychotic medications, such as haloperidol, are sometimes used to control
severe agitation and hallucinations. However, antipsychotic medications may
reduce the seizure threshold in patients. Dehydration, often exacerbated by
diaphoresis and fever, can be corrected with fluids given by mouth or IV.
Anorexia, vomiting, and diarrhea often occur during withdrawal. The
emergence of focal neurologic symptoms, lateralizing seizures, increased
intracranial pressure, or evidence of skull fractures or other indications of
CNS pathology should prompt clinicians to examine a patient for neurologic
disease.
Warm, supportive psychotherapy in the treatment of DTs is essential.
Patients are often bewildered, frightened, and anxious because of their
tumultuous symptoms, and skillful verbal support is imperative.
Protracted Withdrawal. Symptoms of anxiety, insomnia, and mild
autonomic overactivity are likely to continue for 2 to 6 months after the acute
withdrawal has disappeared. These protracted withdrawal symptoms may
enhance the probability of relapse. Although there is little evidence that
medications are helpful, it is possible that some of the medications used for
the rehabilitation phase, especially acamprosate, may work by diminishing
some of these symptoms. The clinician should warn the patient that some
level of sleep problems or feelings of nervousness might remain after acute
withdrawal and discuss cognitive and behavioral approaches that might be
appropriate to help the patient feel comfortable.
Rehabilitation
For most patients, rehabilitation includes three major components, which are
listed in Table 4-13. These components happen at a difficult time: the patient
may still be experiencing withdrawal symptoms as well as life crises.
Repetition will be necessary, with frequent reminders of how vital abstinence




<<<PAGE 963>>>

with the benzodiazepines. Table 4-24 lists the equivalent therapeutic doses of
benzodiazepines. Even when users take grossly excessive amounts (more
than 2 g) in suicide attempts, the symptoms include only drowsiness,
lethargy, ataxia, some confusion, and mild depression of the user’s vital
signs. The most lethal overdoses occur when the user takes a benzodiazepine
in combination with other sedatives, such as alcohol. In such cases, small
doses of benzodiazepines can cause death. The availability of flumazenil, a
specific benzodiazepine antagonist, has reduced the lethality of the
benzodiazepines. Flumazenil can be used in emergency departments to
reverse the effects of benzodiazepines.
Table 4-24
Approximate
Therapeutic
Benzodiazepines

Equivalent

Doses

Generic Name

Trade Name

Dose (mg)

Alprazolam

Xanax

1

Chlordiazepoxide

Librium

25

Clonazepam

Klonopin

0.5–1.0

Clorazepate

Tranxene

15

Diazepam

Valium

10

Estazolam

Prosom

1

Flurazepam

Dalmane

30

Lorazepam

Ativan

2

Oxazepam

Serax

30

Temazepam

Restoril

20

Triazolam

Halcion

0.25

Quazepam

Doral

15

Zolpidem

Ambien

10

of




<<<PAGE 1675>>>

Trazodone (Desyrel)b

–

–

Tranylcypromine (Parnate)

+

+

Phenelzine (Nardil)

+

+

Pargyline (Eutonyl)

–

+

Isocarboxazid (Marplan)

–

+

Lithium (Eskalith)

+

+

Amphetamines

+

+

Fluoxetine (Prozac)c

–

+

Fluphenazine (Prolixin)

+

+

Thioridazine (Mellaril)

+

+

Chlorprothixene
(Taractan)

–

+

Mesoridazine (Serentil)

–

+

Perphenazine (Trilafon)

–

+

Trifluoperazine (Stelazine)

–

+

Reserpine (Serpasil)

+

+

Haloperidol (Haldol)

–

+

–

+

Monoamine oxidase inhibitors

Other mood-active drugs

Antipsychoticsd

Antianxiety agente
Chlordiazepoxide
(Librium)
Antihypertensive drugs




<<<PAGE 2024>>>

weight gain, and sleep disturbances than the SSRIs. The half-lives and
plasma clearance for most TCAs are very similar.
Therapeutic Indications
The indications are similar to those for the SSRIs, which have widely
replaced the TCAs. However, the TCAs represent a reasonable alternative for
persons who cannot tolerate the adverse effects of the SSRIs.
Major Depressive Disorder. The treatment of a major depressive episode
and the prophylactic treatment of MDD are the principal indications for using
TCAs. Although the TCAs are effective in the treatment of depression in
persons with bipolar I disorder, they are more likely to induce mania,
hypomania, or cycling than the newer antidepressants, most notably the
SSRIs and bupropion. It is thus not advised that TCAs be routinely used to
treat depression associated with bipolar I or bipolar II disorder.
Melancholic features, prior major depressive episodes, and a family history
of depressive disorders increase the likelihood of therapeutic response. All of
the available TCAs are equally effective in the treatment of depressive
disorders. In the case of a person, however, one tricyclic or tetracyclic may be
useful, and another one may be ineffective. The treatment of a major
depressive episode with psychotic features almost always requires the
coadministration of an antipsychotic drug and an antidepressant.
Although it is used worldwide as an antidepressant, clomipramine is only
approved in the United States for the treatment of OCD.
Panic Disorder with Agoraphobia. Imipramine is the TCA most studied
for panic disorder with agoraphobia, but other TCAs are also useful when
taken at the usual antidepressant dosages. Because of the potential initial
anxiogenic effects of the TCAs, starting dosages should be small, and the
dosage should be titrated upward slowly. Small doses of benzodiazepines
may be used initially to deal with this side effect.
Generalized Anxiety Disorder. The FDA approves the use of doxepin for
the treatment of anxiety disorders. Some research data show that imipramine
may also be useful. Although rarely used anymore, a chlordiazepoxide–
amitriptyline combination (Limbitrol) is available for mixed anxiety and




<<<PAGE 2048>>>

7Li (92.58 percent). The latter isotope allows the imaging of lithium by

magnetic resonance spectroscopy. Some 300 mg of lithium is contained in
1,597 mg of lithium carbonate (Li2CO3). Most lithium used in the United
States is obtained from dry lake mining in Chile and Argentina.
Pharmacologic Actions
Lithium is rapidly and completely absorbed after oral administration, with
peak serum concentrations occurring in 1 to 1.5 hours with standard
preparations and in 4 to 4.5 hours with slow-release and controlled-release
preparations. Lithium does not bind to plasma proteins, is not metabolized,
and is excreted through the kidneys. The plasma half-life is initially 1.3 days
and is 2.4 days after administration for more than 1 year. The blood–brain
barrier permits only the slow passage of lithium, which is why a single
overdose does not necessarily cause toxicity and why long-term lithium
intoxication is slow to resolve. The elimination half-life of lithium is 18 to 24
hours in young adults but is shorter in children and more prolonged in elderly
persons. Renal clearance of lithium is decreased with renal insufficiency.
Equilibrium is reached after 5 to 7 days of regular intake. Obesity is
associated with higher rates of lithium clearance. The excretion of lithium is
complex during pregnancy; excretion increases during pregnancy but
decreases after delivery. Lithium is excreted in breast milk and insignificant
amounts in the feces and sweat. Thyroid and renal concentrations of lithium
are higher than serum levels.
An explanation for the mood-stabilizing effects of lithium remains elusive.
Theories include alterations of ion transport and effects on neurotransmitters
and neuropeptides, signal transduction pathways, and second messenger
systems.
Therapeutic Indications
Bipolar I Disorder
MANIC EPISODES. Lithium controls acute mania and prevents relapse in about
80 percent of persons with bipolar I disorder and in a somewhat smaller
percentage of persons with mixed (mania and depression) episodes, rapidcycling bipolar disorder, or mood changes in encephalopathy. Lithium has a




<<<PAGE 2107>>>

clonic (grand mal) and complex partial (psychomotor, temporal lobe)
seizures, phenytoin is also used for the treatment of acute mania in bipolar
disorder.
Precautions and Adverse Reactions. The most common adverse
reactions reported with phenytoin therapy are usually dose-related and
include nystagmus, ataxia, slurred speech, decreased coordination, and
mental confusion. Other side effects include dizziness, insomnia, transient
nervousness, motor twitching, and headaches. There have been rare reports of
phenytoin induced dyskinesias, similar to those induced by phenothiazine and
other neuroleptic drugs. More severe side effects include thrombocytopenia,
leukopenia, agranulocytosis, and pancytopenia, with or without bone marrow
suppression.
Several reports have suggested the development of lymphadenopathy
(local or generalized), including benign lymph node hyperplasia,
pseudolymphoma, lymphoma, and Hodgkin’s disease. Prenatal exposure to
phenytoin may increase the risks for congenital malformations, and a
potentially life-threatening bleeding disorder related to decreased levels of
vitamin K–dependent clotting factors may occur in newborns exposed to
phenytoin in utero. Hyperglycemia has been reported with phenytoin use;
also, the agent may increase the serum glucose level in patients with diabetes.
Drug Interactions. Acute alcohol intake, amiodarone, chlordiazepoxide,
cimetidine, diazepam, disulfiram, estrogens, fluoxetine, H2-antagonists,
isoniazid, methylphenidate, phenothiazines, salicylates, and trazodone may
increase phenytoin serum levels. Drugs that may lower phenytoin levels
include carbamazepine, chronic alcohol abuse, and reserpine.
Laboratory Interferences. Phenytoin may decrease serum concentrations
of thyroxine. It may cause increased serum levels of glucose, alkaline
phosphatase, and γ-glutamyl transpeptidase.
Dosage and Clinical Guidelines. Patients may be started on one 100-mg
extended oral capsule three times daily, and the dosage then adjusted to suit
individual requirements. Patients may then be switched to once-a-day dosing,
which is more convenient. In this case, extended-release capsules may be




<<<PAGE 2112>>>

agents for children.

21.4 Anxiolytics
BENZODIAZEPINES AND DRUGS ACTING ON GABA
RECEPTORS
The first benzodiazepine to be introduced was chlordiazepoxide (Librium), in
1959. In 1963, diazepam (Valium) became available. Over the next three
decades, superior safety and tolerability helped the benzodiazepines replace
the older antianxiety and hypnotic medications, such as the barbiturates and
meprobamate (Miltown). Dozens of benzodiazepines and drugs acting on
benzodiazepine receptors have been synthesized and marketed worldwide.
Many of these agents are not available in the United States. Also, some
benzodiazepines have been discontinued because of a lack of use. Table 2143 lists agents currently available in the United States.
The benzodiazepines derive their name from their molecular structure.
They share a common effect on receptors that have been termed
benzodiazepine receptors, which in turn modulate GABA activity.
Nonbenzodiazepine agonists, such as zolpidem (Ambien), zaleplon (Sonata),
and eszopiclone (Lunesta), are similar to these drugs as they bind at a
location close to the benzodiazepine receptor. However, we discuss these
with the medications for insomnia. Flumazenil (Romazicon), a
benzodiazepine receptor antagonist used to reverse benzodiazepine-induced
sedation and in emergency care of benzodiazepine overdosage, is also
covered here.
Because benzodiazepines have a rapid anxiolytic sedative effect, they are
most commonly used for acute treatment of insomnia, anxiety, agitation, or
anxiety associated with any psychiatric disorder. Also, the benzodiazepines
are used as anesthetics, anticonvulsants, and muscle relaxants and as the
preferred treatment for catatonia. Because of the risk of psychological and
physical dependence associated with long-term use of benzodiazepines,
ongoing assessment should be made as to the continued clinical need for
these drugs in treating patients. In most patients, given the nature of their




<<<PAGE 2114>>>

The absorption, the attainment of peak concentrations, and the onset of
action are quickest for diazepam (Valium), lorazepam (Ativan), alprazolam
(Xanax), triazolam (Halcion), and estazolam (ProSom). The rapid onset of
effects is vital to persons who take a single dose of a benzodiazepine to calm
an episodic burst of anxiety or to fall asleep rapidly. Several benzodiazepines
are effective after intravenous (IV) injection, but only lorazepam and
midazolam (Versed) have rapid and reliable absorption after intramuscular
(IM) administration.
Diazepam, chlordiazepoxide, clonazepam (Klonopin), clorazepate,
flurazepam (Dalmane), and quazepam (Doral) have plasma half-lives of 30
hours to more than 100 hours and are technically described as long-acting
benzodiazepines. The plasma half-lives of these compounds can be as high as
200 hours in persons whose metabolism is genetically slow. Because the
attainment of steady-state plasma concentrations of the drugs can take up to 2
weeks, persons may experience symptoms and signs of toxicity after only 7
to 10 days of treatment with a dosage that seemed initially to be in the
therapeutic range.
Clinically, half-life alone does not necessarily determine the duration of
therapeutic action for most benzodiazepines. The fact that all
benzodiazepines are lipid-soluble to varying degrees means that
benzodiazepines and their active metabolites bind to plasma proteins. The
extent of this binding is proportional to their lipid solubility. The amount of
protein binding varies from 70 to 99 percent. Distribution, onset, and
termination of action after a single dose are thus determined mainly by
benzodiazepine lipid solubility, not elimination half-life. Preparations with
high lipid solubility, such as diazepam and alprazolam, are absorbed rapidly
from the GI tract and distribute rapidly to the brain by passive diffusion along
a concentration gradient, resulting in a rapid onset of action. However, as the
concentration of the medication increases in the brain and decreases in the
bloodstream, the concentration gradient reverses itself, and these medications
leave the brain rapidly, resulting in fast cessation of drug effect. Drugs with
longer elimination half-lives, such as diazepam, may remain in the
bloodstream for a substantially more extended time than their actual
pharmacologic action at benzodiazepine receptors because the concentration
in the brain decreases rapidly below the level necessary for a noticeable
effect.




<<<PAGE 2115>>>

In contrast, lorazepam, which has a shorter elimination half-life than
diazepam but is less lipid-soluble, has a slower onset of action after a single
dose because the drug is absorbed and enters the brain more slowly.
However, the duration of action after a single dose is longer because it takes
longer for lorazepam to leave the brain and for brain levels to decrease below
the concentration that produces an effect. In chronic dosing, some of these
differences are not as apparent because brain levels are in equilibrium with
higher and more consistent steady-state blood levels, but additional doses still
produce a more rapid but briefer action with diazepam than with lorazepam.
Benzodiazepines are distributed widely in adipose tissue. As a result,
medications may persist in the body after discontinuation longer than would
be predicted from their elimination half-lives. Also, the dynamic half-life
(i.e., duration of action on the receptor) may be longer than the elimination
half-life.
The advantages of long–half-life drugs over short–half-life drugs include
less frequent dosing, less variation in plasma concentration, and less severe
withdrawal phenomena. The disadvantages include drug accumulation,
increased risk of daytime psychomotor impairment, and increased daytime
sedation.
The half-lives of lorazepam, oxazepam (Serax), temazepam (Restoril), and
estazolam are between 8 and 30 hours. Alprazolam has a half-life of 10 to 15
hours, and triazolam has the shortest half-life (2 to 3 hours) of all the orally
administered benzodiazepines. Rebound insomnia and anterograde amnesia
are thought to be more of a problem with the short–half-life drugs than with
the long–half-life drugs.
Because the administration of medications more frequently than the
elimination half-life leads to drug accumulation, medications such as
diazepam and flurazepam accumulate with daily dosing, eventually resulting
in increased daytime sedation.
Some benzodiazepines (e.g., oxazepam) are conjugated directly by
glucuronidation and are excreted. Most benzodiazepines are oxidized first by
CYP3A4 and CYP2C19, often to active metabolites. These metabolites may
then be hydroxylated to another active metabolite. For example, diazepam is
oxidized to desmethyldiazepam, which, in turn, is hydroxylated to produce
oxazepam. These products undergo glucuronidation to inactive metabolites.
Several benzodiazepines (e.g., diazepam, chlordiazepoxide) have the same




<<<PAGE 2118>>>

The definitive treatment for catatonia is ECT.
Akathisia. The first-line drug for akathisia is most commonly a β-adrenergic
receptor antagonist. However, benzodiazepines are also useful in treating
some patients with akathisia.
Other Psychiatric Indications. Chlordiazepoxide (Librium) and
clorazepate (Tranxene) are used to manage the symptoms of alcohol
withdrawal. The benzodiazepines (especially IM lorazepam) are used to
manage substance-induced and psychotic agitation in the emergency
department. Benzodiazepines have been used instead of amobarbital
(Amytal) for drug-assisted interviewing.
Flumazenil for Benzodiazepine Overdosage. Flumazenil is used to
reverse the adverse psychomotor, amnestic, and sedative effects of
benzodiazepine receptor agonists. Flumazenil is administered IV and has a
half-life of 7 to 15 minutes. The most common adverse effects of flumazenil
are nausea, vomiting, dizziness, agitation, emotional lability, cutaneous
vasodilation, injection-site pain, fatigue, impaired vision, and headache. The
most common serious adverse effect associated with the use of flumazenil is
the precipitation of seizures, which is most likely to occur in persons with
seizure disorders, those who are physically dependent on benzodiazepines,
and those who have ingested large quantities of benzodiazepines. Flumazenil
alone may impair memory retrieval.
In mixed-drug overdosage, the toxic effects (e.g., seizures and cardiac
arrhythmias) of other drugs (e.g., TCAs) may emerge with the reversal of the
benzodiazepine effects of flumazenil. For example, seizures caused by an
overdosage of TCAs may have been partially treated in a person who had
also taken an overdosage of benzodiazepines. With flumazenil treatment, the
tricyclic-induced seizures or cardiac arrhythmias may appear and result in a
fatal outcome. Flumazenil does not reverse the effects of ethanol,
barbiturates, or opioids.
For the initial management of a known or suspected benzodiazepine
overdosage, the recommended initial dosage of flumazenil is 0.2 mg (2 mL)
administered IV over 30 seconds. If the desired consciousness is not obtained
after 30 seconds, a further dose of 0.3 mg (3 mL) can be administered over 30




<<<PAGE 2122>>>

Hyperacusis

Myoclonus

Nausea

Delirium

Difficulty concentrating

Seizures

Drug Interactions
The most common and potentially severe benzodiazepine receptor agonist
interaction is excessive sedation and respiratory depression occurring when
benzodiazepines are administered concomitantly with other CNS depressants,
such as alcohol, barbiturates, tricyclic and tetracyclic drugs, DRAs, opioids,
and antihistamines. Ataxia and dysarthria may be likely to occur when
lithium, antipsychotics, and clonazepam are combined. The combination of
benzodiazepines and clozapine (Clozaril) has been reported to cause delirium
and should be avoided. Cimetidine (Tagamet), disulfiram (Antabuse),
isoniazid, estrogen, and oral contraceptives increase the plasma concentration
of diazepam, chlordiazepoxide, clorazepate, and flurazepam. However,
antacids may reduce the GI absorption of benzodiazepines. The plasma
concentrations of triazolam and alprazolam are increased to potentially toxic
concentrations by nefazodone (Serzone) and fluvoxamine (Luvox).
The manufacturer of nefazodone recommends that the dosage of triazolam
be lowered by 75 percent, and the dosage of alprazolam be lowered by 50
percent, when given concomitantly with nefazodone. Over-the-counter
preparations of the kava plant, advertised as a “natural tranquilizer,” can
potentiate the action of benzodiazepine receptor agonists through synergistic
overactivation of GABA receptors. Carbamazepine can lower the plasma
concentration of alprazolam. Antacids and food may decrease the plasma
concentrations of benzodiazepines, and smoking may increase the
metabolism of benzodiazepines. The benzodiazepines may increase the
plasma concentrations of phenytoin and digoxin (Lanoxin). The SSRIs may
prolong and exacerbate the severity of zolpidem-induced hallucinations.
Deaths have been reported when parental lorazepam is given with parental
olanzapine.
Dosage and Clinical Guidelines




<<<PAGE 2566>>>

Alcohol delirium

Confusion,
A benzodiazepine;
disorientation,
haloperidol for
fluctuating
psychotic symptoms
consciousness
may be added if
and perception,
necessary
autonomic
hyperactivity; may
be fatal

Alcohol intoxication

Disinhibited
behavior,
sedation at high
doses

Alcohol-persisting
amnestic disorder

Confusion, loss of
Hospitalization;
memory even for
hypnosis; rule out
all personal
organic cause
identification data

Alcohol-persisting
dementia

Confusion, agitation, Rule out other causes
impulsivity
for dementia; no
effective treatment;
hospitalization if
necessary

Alcohol psychotic
disorder with
hallucinations

Vivid auditory (at
Haloperidol for
times visual)
psychotic symptoms
hallucinations with
affect appropriate
to content (often
fearful); clear
sensorium

Alcohol seizures

Grand mal seizures; Diazepam, phenytoin;
rarely status
prevent by using
epilepticus
chlordiazepoxide
during detoxification

Alcohol withdrawal

Irritability, nausea,

With time and protective
environment,
symptoms abate

Fluid and electrolytes




<<<PAGE 2783>>>

smartphones, to name a few—shed some light on their potential to adapt to
new and challenging demands.

PRENATAL, INFANT, AND CHILD
The phases of development described in this section are defined as follows:
prenatal is the time frame from conception to 8 weeks; the fetus, from 8
weeks to birth; infancy, from birth to 15 months; the toddler period, from 15
months to 2½ years; the preschool period, from 2½ years to 6 years; and the
middle years, from 6 to 12 years.

PRENATAL
Historically, the analysis of human development began with birth. The
influence of endogenous and exogenous in utero factors, however, now
requires that developmental schemes consider intrauterine events. The infant
is not a tabula rasa, a smooth slate upon which outside influences etch
patterns. On the contrary, myriad factors within the womb have already
influenced the newborn. For example, the studies of Stella Chess and
Alexander Thomas (described later) have demonstrated a wide range of
temperamental differences among newborns. Maternal stress, through the
production of adrenal hormones, also influences the behavioral characteristics
of newborns.
The time frame in which the development of the embryo and fetus occurs
is known as the prenatal period. After implantation, the egg begins to divide
and is known as an embryo. Growth and development occur at a rapid pace;
by the end of 8 weeks, the shape is recognizably human, and the embryo has
become a fetus. Figure 32-1 illustrates a sonogram of a 9-week and 15-week
fetus in utero.
The fetus maintains an internal equilibrium that, with variable effects,
interacts continuously with the intrauterine environment. In general, most
disorders that occur are multifactorial—the result of a combination of effects,
some of which can be cumulative. Damage at the fetal stage usually has a
more global impact than damage after birth, because rapidly growing organs
are the most vulnerable. Boys are more vulnerable to developmental damage
than girls are; geneticists recognize that in humans and animals, female




<<<PAGE 2870>>>

fewer contractions at the time of orgasm. Women do not reach their sexual
prime until their mid-30s; consequently, they have a greater capacity for
orgasm in middle adulthood than in young adulthood. Women, however, are
more vulnerable than men to narcissistic blows to their self-esteem as they
lose their youthful appearance, which is overvalued in today’s society.
During middle adulthood, they may feel less sexually desirable than in early
adulthood and, thus, feel less entitled to adequate sex life. An inability to deal
with changes in body image prompts many women and men to undergo
cosmetic surgery to maintain their youthful appearance.
The demands of raising children interfere with the privacy and emotional
equilibrium required for intimacy, as do the pressures and responsibilities of
work. Fatigue and diminished interest are common denominators in these
circumstances. Patients with deeply rooted problems with sexuality or
relationships may use aging, work, and relationships with children or elderly
parents as a means of rationalizing their conflicts and refusing to analyze
them.
Climacterium
Middle adulthood is the time of the male and female climacterium, the period
in a life characterized by decreased biologic and physiologic functioning. For
women, the menopausal period is considered the climacterium, and it may
start anywhere from the 40s to the early 50s. Bernice Neugarten studied this
period and found that more than 50 percent of women described menopause
as an unpleasant experience. Still, a significant portion believed that their
lives had not changed in any meaningful way, and many women experienced
no adverse effects. Because they no longer had to worry about becoming
pregnant, some women report feeling sexually freer after menopause than
before its onset. Generally, the female climacterium has been stereotyped as a
sudden or radical psychophysiological experience. Still, it is more often a
gradual experience as estrogen secretion decreases with changes in the flow,
timing, and eventual cessation of the menses. Vasomotor instability (hot
flashes) can occur, and menopause can extend over several years. Some
women experience anxiety and depression, but women who have a history of
poor adaptation to stress are more predisposed to the menopausal syndrome.
For men, the climacterium has no clear demarcation; male hormones stay




<<<PAGE 3029>>>

favored. GABA transported into astrocytes is catabolized by GABA-T and
ultimately converted to glutamic acid and then to glutamine, which is
transported back into the presynaptic terminal for GABA synthesis.
Tiagabine (Gabitril) is a potent GABA transport inhibitor that is used to treat
epilepsy. Preliminary results suggest that it also may be useful in panic
disorder.
GABAA RECEPTORS. GABAA receptors are distributed throughout the brain.

The GABAA complex, when activated, mediates an increase in membrane
conductance with an equilibrium potential near the resting membrane
potential of –70 mV (Fig. 33-20). In the mature neuron, this typically results
with an influx of Cl−, causing membrane hyperpolarization.
Hyperpolarization is inhibitory because it increases the threshold for
generating an action potential. In immature neurons, which have unusually
high levels of intracellular Cl−, activating the GABAA receptor can
counterintuitively cause depolarization. For this reason, anticonvulsants that
act by enhancing GABAA receptor activity may exacerbate seizures in the
neonatal period.
Barbiturates such as phenobarbital and pentobarbital are noted for their
sedative and anticonvulsant activities. Barbiturates allosterically increase the
affinities of the binding sites for GABA and benzodiazepines at
pharmacologically relevant concentrations. Barbiturates also affect channel
dynamics by markedly increasing the extended open state and reducing the
short open state, thereby increasing Cl− inhibition. Chemically modified
analogs of progesterone and corticosterone have been shown in behavioral
studies to have sedative and anxiolytic effects through their interaction with
the GABAA receptor complex. They share features with barbiturates,
although they act at a distinctly different site. Thus, they allosterically
enhance agonist ligand binding to the receptor and increase the duration of
chloride channel opening. A variety of behavioral effects associated with
steroid administration or fluctuation of endogenous steroids and sex-specific
effects of GABAergic drugs have been linked to the action of endogenous
neurosteroids.




<<<PAGE 3104>>>

Linkage Disequilibrium. Linkage disequilibrium (LD) is a phenomenon
that is used to evaluate the genetic distance between loci in populations rather
than in families. When alleles at two loci occur together in the population
more often than would be expected given the allele frequencies at the two
loci, those alleles are said to be in LD. When strong LD is observed between
two loci, it usually indicates that the two loci are sited in very close physical
proximity to one another on a given chromosome and is useful in mapping
disease susceptibility loci because one locus can be used to predict the
presence of another locus. This predictability is vital because current genemapping strategies can sample only a subset of the estimated 10 million
common human polymorphisms. Because of the existence of LD, one can use
data from a subset of genotyped polymorphisms to infer genotypes at nearby
loci. Clusters of alleles that are in LD and inherited as a single unit are termed
haplotypes. Thus LD mapping “consolidates” genomic information by
identifying haplotypes in populations that can then be used to infer IBD
sharing among unrelated individuals.
There are several methods to measure the extent of LD. One of the most
commonly used measures of LD is r2, a measure of the difference between
observed and expected haplotype probabilities. Unlike D′, another widely
used measure of LD, r2 values do not depend on the allele frequencies of the
loci being assessed. A considerable r2 value indicates that the observed
frequency of association between two alleles is more significant than that
expected by chance; that is, the alleles are in LD. LD studies have
traditionally been used to complement traditional pedigree analyses, for
example, to hone in on a locus that has been mapped by linkage analysis.
However, LD-based association analysis has become the method of choice
for whole-genome screens, particularly for diseases where traditional linkage
studies have been unsuccessful. These studies have one great advantage over
a traditional family analysis. Because affected individuals are chosen from an
entire population, the only limit to the number of potential subjects is the
population size and disease frequency. Maximizing the potential number of
affected individuals that can be included in the analysis is extremely
important for disorders where genetic heterogeneity or incomplete penetrance
is likely to be a factor.




<<<PAGE 3622>>>

memory, 80
mood, 79
motor behavior, 80
orientation, 79
parent–child interaction, 79
physical appearance, 79
separation and reunion, 79
social relatedness, 80
speech and language, 79
thought process and content, 79–80
questionnaires and rating scales, 78
recommendations and treatment plan, 84
Children’s Apperception Test (CAT), 84
Children’s Depression Rating Scale-Revised (CDRS-R), 176, 177
Children’s Interview for Psychiatric Syndromes (ChIPS), 77–78
Children’s Personality Questionnaire, 83t
Chinese Classification of Mental Disorders (CCMD-2-R), 1056
Chloral hydrate, 298, 678–679
Chlordiazepoxide, for alcohol withdrawal treatment, 281
Chlorpromazine, 602, 619, 622
for schizophrenia, 353t
Cholecystokinin (CCK), 479, 969
Cholinesterase inhibitors, 696, 959, 986
dosage and clinical guidelines, 698
drug interactions, 698
pharmacologic actions, 697
precautions and adverse reactions, 697–698, 698t
therapeutic indications, 697
Chorionic villi sampling (CVS), 97
Chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS), 986
immune component of, 985
Chronic grief, 851
Chronic illness care model, 874
Chronic motor or vocal tic disorder, 162
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), and insomnia, 491
Chronobiology, 1001–1002
Chronotherapy, 514–515




<<<PAGE 3680>>>

Limbic leukotomy, 741
outcome with, 742
Limbic system
function of, 934
innervation, 954–955
in schizophrenia, 358
LIMK kinase, 949
Lindemann, Eric, 753
Linkage analysis, gene mapping and, 987f
Linkage disequilibrium (LD), 988–989
Linoleic acid (LA), 977–978
α-Linolenic acid (ALA), 977
Lisdexamfetamine (Vyvanse), 685t
LIS-1 protein, 949
Lissencephalies, 949
Listening, 21
Lithium, 19, 129, 592, 598, 600, 601
for acute mania, 373
dosage and clinical guidelines, 653–654
drug interactions, 653, 654t
for early-onset bipolar disorder, 183
laboratory interferences, 653
laboratory monitoring, 654–655
maintenance treatment with, 649
nonpsychiatric uses of, 650t
patient education, 655, 655t
pharmacologic actions, 649
precautions and adverse effects, 650–653, 651t
in adolescents, 653
cardiac effects, 651, 652
cognitive effects, 651
dermatologic effects, 652
in elderly persons, 653
gastrointestinal effects, 651
neurologic effects, 651
in pregnant women, 653
renal effects, 651–652


