<<<PAGE 206>>>

LITHIUM. Lithium (Eskalith) has a narrow therapeutic index. Consequently,

blood levels of lithium must be monitored to achieve therapeutic dosing and
avoid toxicity. Side effects are dose-dependent. Symptoms of toxicity include
tremors, sedation, and confusion. At higher levels, delirium, seizures, and
coma may occur. Symptoms of toxicity may begin to manifest with serum
levels of greater than 1.2 mEq/L and are common with levels greater than 1.4
mEq/L. Elderly or debilitated patients may show signs of toxicity with levels
of less than 1.2 mEq/L.
Because of the risk of hepatotoxicity, ranging from mild
dysfunction to hepatic necrosis, pretreatment LFTs are usually obtained.
More commonly valproate (valproic acid [Depakene] and divalproex
[Depakote]) may cause a sustained elevation in liver transaminase levels of as
much as three times the upper limit of normal.
Valproate may increase the risk of congenital disabilities. A pretreatment
urine pregnancy test is usually obtained in women of childbearing years.
Women should be cautioned to use adequate contraception.
Hematologic abnormalities are also possible and include leucopenia and
thrombocytopenia. Treatment with valproate may increase serum ammonia
levels. It is prudent to obtain an ammonia level in a patient undergoing
valproate treatment who presents with altered mental status or lethargy.
Acute pancreatitis may also occur.
VALPROATE.

Antidepressants
Treatment with monoamine oxidase
inhibitors (MAOIs) can cause orthostasis and, rarely, hypertensive crisis.
Baseline blood pressure measurement should be obtained before the initiation
of treatment, and blood pressure should be monitored during treatment.
There are no meaningful blood levels for MAOIs, and direct monitoring of
MAOI blood levels is not clinically indicated. Treatment with MAOIs is
occasionally associated with hepatotoxicity. For this reason, LFTs usually are
obtained at the initiation of treatment and periodically after.
MONOAMINE

OXIDASE

INHIBITORS.

TRICYCLIC AND TETRACYCLIC ANTIDEPRESSANTS. Routine laboratory studies

obtained before initiation of tricyclic or tetracyclic antidepressants (TCAs)




<<<PAGE 820>>>

Valproate

Absence, myoclonic, generalized
tonic–clonic, akinetic, partial
seizures

750–1,000

Zonisamide

Generalized

400–600

MEMORY. Loss of memory is a frequent symptom of brain tumors. Patients

with brain tumors exhibit an amnestic syndrome and retain no memory of
events that occurred since the illness began. Events of the immediate past,
even painful ones, are lost. Patients, however, retain old memories and are
unaware of their loss of recent memory.
Prominent perceptual defects are often associated with
behavioral disorders, mainly because patients must integrate tactile, auditory,
and visual perceptions to function normally.
PERCEPTION.

AWARENESS. Alterations of consciousness are common late symptoms of

increased intracranial pressure caused by a brain tumor. Tumors arising in the
upper part of the brainstem can produce a unique symptom called akinetic
mutism, or vigilant coma. The patient is immobile and mute yet alert.
Colloid Cysts. Although they are not brain tumors, colloid cysts located in
the third ventricle can exert physical pressure on structures within the
diencephalon and produce such mental symptoms as depression, emotional
lability, psychotic symptoms, and personality changes. The classic associated
neurologic symptoms are position-dependent intermittent headaches.
Head Trauma
Head trauma can result in an array of mental symptoms and lead to a
diagnosis of dementia due to head trauma or to mental disorder not otherwise
specified due to a general medical condition (e.g., postconcussional disorder).
The postconcussive syndrome remains controversial because it focuses on the
full range of psychiatric symptoms, some serious, that can follow what seems
to be minor head trauma.
Pathophysiology. Head trauma is a common clinical situation; an




<<<PAGE 1198>>>

Medications are the treatments of choice for patients with bipolar disorders.
However, psychotherapies can offer an essential adjunct to treatment.
Somatic Treatments
Pharmacotherapy
GENERAL CLINICAL GUIDELINES. We can divide the pharmacologic treatment of

bipolar disorders into acute and maintenance phases. Bipolar treatment,
however, also involves the formulation of different strategies for the patient
who is experiencing mania or hypomania or depression. Lithium and its
augmentation by antidepressants, antipsychotics, and benzodiazepines have
been the principal approach to the illness. However, three anticonvulsant
mood stabilizers—carbamazepine, valproate, and lamotrigine—are
commonly used options, as well as a series of atypical antipsychotics. Often,
it is necessary to try different medications before finding an optimal
treatment. Furthermore, although one strives for monotherapy, in the case of
bipolar disorder, polypharmacy is common.
Table 6-6
Recommendations for Pharmacologic Treatment of Acute
Mania
First line

Monotherapy: lithium, divalproex, divalproex ER,
olanzapine, risperidone, quetiapine, quetiapine
XR, aripiprazole, ziprasidone, asenapine,
paliperidone ER, cariprazine
Adjunctive therapy with lithium or divalproex:
risperidone, quetiapine, olanzapine,
aripiprazole, asenapine

Second line

Monotherapy: carbamazepine, carbamazepine
ER, ECT, haloperidol
Combination therapy: lithium + divalproex

Third line

Monotherapy: chlorpromazine, clozapine,
tamoxifen




<<<PAGE 1200>>>

Anticonvulsants. Valproate (valproic acid or divalproex sodium) has
surpassed lithium in use for acute mania. Unlike lithium, valproate is only
indicated for acute mania, although most experts agree it also has
prophylactic effects. Normal dose levels of valproic acid are 750 to 2,500
mg/day, achieving blood levels between 50 and 120 µg/mL. Rapid oral
loading with 15 to 20 mg/kg of divalproex sodium from day 1 of treatment
has been well tolerated and associated with a rapid onset of response. Some
laboratory testing is required during valproate treatment.
Carbamazepine has been used worldwide for decades as a first-line
treatment for acute mania. The FDA approved it for acute mania in the
United States in 2004. Typical doses of carbamazepine to treat acute mania
range between 600 and 1,800 mg/day associated with blood levels of between
4 and 12 µg/mL. The keto congener of carbamazepine, oxcarbazepine, is
better tolerated than carbamazepine, but the data for its efficacy are
conflicting. A Cochrane review concluded there is insufficient evidence for
this medication in acute mania.
Antipsychotics. The FDA approved many of the atypical antipsychotics for
use in bipolar disorder. We list them in Table 6-7. Compared with older
agents, such as haloperidol and chlorpromazine, atypical antipsychotics have
a lesser liability for excitatory postsynaptic potential and tardive dyskinesia;
many do not increase prolactin. However, many of them have the risk of
weight gain with its associated medical problems. Some patients, however,
require maintenance treatment with antipsychotic medication.
Acute Bipolar Depression
Lithium. There is limited evidence for lithium in bipolar depression. Early
studies were promising, but later placebo-controlled studies did not confirm
lithium’s efficacy. More extensive studies that included lithium did suggest
that lithium was at least as useful as other mood stabilizers for bipolar
depression.
Anticonvulsants. The most promising anticonvulsant has been lamotrigine,
which has several reasonable studies showing efficacy for bipolar depression.
Its major limitation is that it must be titrated gradually to prevent a severe




<<<PAGE 1436>>>

Electroconvulsive therapy (for refractory depression with persistent
melancholic features across all dissociative identity disorder
alters)
Mood stabilizers (more useful for PTSD and anxiety than mood
swings)
Divalproex
Lamotrigine
Oral or intramuscular benzodiazepines
Medications for sleep problems
Low-dose trazodone
Low-dose mirtazapine
Low-dose tricyclic antidepressants
Low-dose neuroleptics
Benzodiazepines (often less helpful for sleep problems in this
population)
Zolpidem
Anticholinergic agents (diphenhydramine, hydroxyzine)
Medications for self-injury, addictions
Naltrexone
Brainwashing
There are no empirical treatment studies of individuals subjected to extreme
coercion applied in the service of indoctrination into a belief system or an
attempt at identity alteration. The basic principles of phased trauma treatment
would seem to provide an organizing framework for their care, as for victims
of other forms of torture. Family and social interventions may be necessary
because of the duress and disruption accompanying the precipitating events
and the social effects of the profound changes in the patient’s attitudes,
behaviors, and beliefs, as well as sequestration from everyday events during
the period of captivity.
Ganser Syndrome
No systematic treatment studies have been conducted, given the rarity of this
condition. In most case reports, the patient has been hospitalized and
provided with a protective and supportive environment. In some instances,




<<<PAGE 1817>>>

EEG

Low-dose
antipsychotics

Predatory aggression
(cold blooded
revenge/cruelty)

No Effective
Pharmacologic Tx

Benzodiazepines
(disinhibition)

Organic-like aggression
(traumatic brain
injury)

Beta-Blockers,
Valproates,
Quetiapine,
Carbamazepine
(CBMZ), TCAs,
cholinesterase
inhibitors
(donepezil)

Benzodiazepines
(disinhibition,
delirium)

Ictal aggression
(abnormal EEG)

CBMZ,
TCAs, Low-potency
Diphenylhydantoin,
typical
Valproate
antipsychotics
Benzodiazepines
(both increase
(clonazepam)
risk of seizures)

III. Social and Emotional Detachment
Chronic asociality and disinterest
Blunted affect

Low-Dose
Antipsychotics
(aripiprazole,
olanzapine, lowdose clozapine,
sulpiride)

IV. Cognitive-Perceptual Distortions/Psychotic Symptoms
Acute and brief
psychotic episodes

Novel Antipsychotics
(Risperdal,
olanzapine)
Typical neuroleptics
(for the duration of




<<<PAGE 1966>>>

Bromocriptine

Antipsychotic antagonizes
dopamine receptor
stimulation

Increased prolactin

Caffeinated
beverages

Form precipitate with
antipsychotic solutions

Possible diminished
antipsychotic
effect

Cimetidine

Reduced antipsychotic
Decreased
absorption and clearance
antipsychotic
effect

Clonidine

Antipsychotic potentiates α- Hypotension or
adrenergic hypotensive
hypertension
effect

Disulfiram

Impairs antipsychotic
metabolism

Increased
antipsychotic
concentrations

Methyldopa

Unknown

BP elevations

Phenytoin

Induction of antipsychotic
metabolism; decreased
phenytoin metabolism

Decreased
antipsychotic
concentrations:
increased
phenytoin levels

SSRIs

Impair antipsychotic
metabolism;
pharmacodynamic
interaction

Sudden onset of
extrapyramidal
symptoms

Valproic acid

Antipsychotic inhibits
Increased valproic
valproic acid metabolism
acid half-life and
levels

ACEI, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor; AD, antidepressant; BP, blood pressure; CNS,
central nervous system; GI, gastrointestinal; SSRI, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor.
From Ereshosky L, Overman GP, Karp JK. Current psychotropic dosing and monitoring
guidelines. Prim Psychiatry. 1996;3:21, with permission.




<<<PAGE 2068>>>

debate. A prospective 3-year study found patients who maintained a
concentration between 0.4 and 0.6 mEq/L (mean 0.54) were 2.6 times more
likely to relapse than those who maintained between 0.8 and 1.0 mEq/L
(mean 0.83). However, higher blood concentrations produced more adverse
effects and were less well tolerated.
If there is no response after 2 weeks at a concentration that is beginning to
cause adverse effects, then the person should taper off lithium over 1 to 2
weeks, and other mood-stabilizing drugs should be tried.
Patient Education. Lithium has a narrow therapeutic index, and many
factors can upset the balance between lithium concentrations that are well
tolerated and therapeutic, and those that produce side effects or toxicity. It is
thus imperative that persons taking lithium be educated about signs and
symptoms of toxicity, factors that affect lithium levels, how and when to
obtain laboratory testing, and the importance of regular communication with
the prescribing physician. Lithium concentrations can be disrupted by
common factors such as excessive sweating from ambient heat or exercise or
the use of widely prescribed agents such as ACEIs or NSAIDs. Patients may
stop taking their lithium because they are feeling well or because they are
experiencing side effects. They should be advised against discontinuing or
modifying their lithium regimen. Table 21-31 lists some essential instructions
for patients.

VALPROATE
Valproate (Depakene, Depakote), or valproic acid, is approved for the
treatment of manic episodes associated with bipolar I disorder and is one of
the most widely prescribed mood stabilizers in psychiatry. It has a rapid onset
of action and is well-tolerated, and numerous studies suggest that it reduces
the frequency and intensity of recurrent manic episodes over extended
periods.
Chemistry
Valproate is a simple-chain branch carboxylic acid. It is called valproic acid
because it is rapidly converted to the acid form in the stomach. Multiple
formulations of valproic acid are marketed. These include valproic acid




<<<PAGE 2069>>>

(Depakene), divalproex sodium (Depakote), an enteric-coated delayed-release
1:1 mixture of valproic acid and sodium valproate available in tablet and
sprinkle formulation (can be opened and spread on food); and sodium
valproate injection (Depacon). Extended-release preparation is also available.
Each of these is therapeutically equivalent because, at physiologic pH,
valproic acid dissociates into valproate ion.
Table 21-31
Instructions to Patients Taking Lithium
Lithium can be remarkably effective in treating your disorder. If not
used appropriately and not monitored closely, it can be ineffective
and potentially harmful. It is important to keep the following
instructions in mind.
Dosing
Take lithium exactly as directed by your doctor—never take more or
less than the prescribed dose.
Do not stop taking without speaking to your doctor.
If you miss a dose, take it as soon as possible. If it is within 4 hr of
the next dose, skip the missed dose (about 6 hr in the case of
extended-release or slow-release preparations). Never double up
doses.
Blood Tests
Comply with the schedule of recommended regular blood tests.
Despite their inconvenience and discomfort, your lithium blood levels,
thyroid function, and kidney status need to be monitored as long as
you take lithium.
When going to have lithium levels checked, you should have taken
your last lithium dose 12 hr earlier.
Use of Other Medications
Do not start any prescription or over-the-counter medications without
telling your doctor.
Even drugs such as ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin) and naproxen (Aleve)
can significantly increase lithium levels.




<<<PAGE 2070>>>

Diet and Fluid Intake
Avoid sudden changes in your diet or fluid intake. If you do go on a
diet, your doctor may need to increase the frequency of blood
tests.
Caffeine and alcohol act as diuretics and can lower your lithium
concentrations.
During treatment with lithium, it is recommended that you drink about
2 or 3 quarts of fluid daily and use normal amounts of salt.
Inform your doctor if you start or stop a low-salt diet.
Recognizing Potential Problems
If you engage in vigorous exercise or have an illness that causes
sweating, vomiting, or diarrhea, consult your doctor because these
might affect lithium levels.
Nausea, constipation, shakiness, increased thirst, frequency of
urination, weight gain, or swelling of the extremities should be
reported to your doctor.
Blurred vision, confusion, loss of appetite, diarrhea, vomiting, muscle
weakness, lethargy, shakiness, slurred speech, dizziness, loss of
balance, inability to urinate, or seizures could indicate severe
toxicity and should prompt immediate medical attention.
Pharmacologic Actions
Regardless of how it is formulated, valproate is rapidly and completely
absorbed 1 to 2 hours after oral administration, with peak concentrations
occurring 4 to 5 hours after oral administration. The plasma half-life of
valproate is 10 to 16 hours. Valproate is highly protein-bound. Protein
binding becomes saturated at higher dosages, and concentrations of
therapeutically effective free valproate increase at serum concentrations
above 50 to 100 µg/mL. The unbound portion of valproate is considered to be
pharmacologically active and can cross the blood–brain barrier. The
extended-release preparation produces lower peak concentrations and higher
minimum concentrations and can be given once a day. Valproate is
metabolized primarily by hepatic glucuronidation and mitochondrial β




<<<PAGE 2071>>>

oxidation.
The biochemical basis of valproate’s therapeutic effects remains poorly
understood. Postulated mechanisms include enhancement of GABA activity,
modulation of voltage-sensitive sodium channels, and action on
extrahypothalamic neuropeptides.
Therapeutic Indications
Valproate is currently approved as monotherapy or adjunctive therapy of
complex partial seizures, monotherapy and adjunctive therapy of simple and
complex absence seizures, and adjunctive therapy for patients with multiple
seizures that include absence seizures. Divalproex has additional indications
for prophylaxis of migraine.
Bipolar I Disorder
ACUTE MANIA. About two-thirds of persons with acute mania respond to
valproate. The majority of patients with mania usually respond within 1 to 4
days after achieving valproate serum concentrations above 50 µg/mL. The
antimanic response is generally associated with levels greater than 50 µg/mL,
in a range of 50 to 125 µg/mL. This serum concentration may be gradually
achieved within 1 week of initiation of dosing, but rapid oral loading
strategies achieve therapeutic serum concentrations in 1 day and can control
manic symptoms within 5 days. The short-term antimanic effects of valproate
can be augmented with the addition of lithium, carbamazepine (Tegretol),
SDAs, or DRAs. Numerous studies have suggested that the irritable manic
subtype responds significantly better to sodium valproate than lithium or
placebo. Because of its more favorable profile of cognitive, dermatologic,
thyroid, and renal adverse effects, valproate is preferred to lithium for the
treatment of acute mania in children and elderly persons.
ACUTE BIPOLAR DEPRESSION. Valproate possesses some activity as a short-

term treatment of depressive episodes in bipolar I disorder, but this effect is
far less pronounced than for the treatment of manic episodes. Among
depressive symptoms, valproate is more useful for the treatment of agitation
than dysphoria. In clinical practice, valproate is most often used as add-on
therapy to an antidepressant to prevent the development of mania or rapid




<<<PAGE 2072>>>

cycling.
PROPHYLAXIS. Studies suggest that valproate is useful in the prophylactic

treatment of bipolar I disorder, resulting in fewer, less severe, and shorter
manic episodes. In direct comparison, valproate is at least as effective as
lithium and is better tolerated than lithium. It may be particularly useful in
persons with rapid-cycling and ultrarapid-cycling bipolar disorders,
dysphoric or mixed mania, and mania caused by a general medical condition
as well as in persons who have comorbid substance use disorders or panic
attacks and in persons who have not had complete favorable responses to
lithium treatment.
Schizophrenia and Schizoaffective Disorder. Valproate may
accelerate response to antipsychotic therapy in patients with schizophrenia or
schizoaffective disorder. Valproate alone is generally less effective in
schizoaffective disorder than in bipolar I disorder. Valproate alone is
ineffective for the treatment of psychotic symptoms and is typically used in
combination with other drugs in patients with these symptoms.
Other Mental Disorders. Valproate has been studied for possible efficacy
in a broad range of psychiatric disorders. These include alcohol withdrawal
and relapse prevention, panic disorder, PTSD, impulse control disorder,
borderline personality disorder, and behavioral agitation and dementia.
Evidence supporting use in these cases is weak, and any observed therapeutic
effects may be related to the treatment of a comorbid bipolar disorder.
Precautions and Adverse Reactions
Although valproate treatment is generally well tolerated and safe, it carries
quite a few black box warnings and other warnings (Table 21-32). The two
most serious adverse effects of valproate treatment affect the pancreas and
liver. Risk factors for potentially fatal hepatotoxicity include young age
(younger than 3 years); concurrent use of phenobarbital; and the presence of
neurologic disorders, especially inborn errors of metabolism. The rate of fatal
hepatotoxicity in persons who have been treated with valproate alone is 0.85
per 100,000 persons; no persons older than the age of 10 years have been
reported to have died from hepatotoxicity. Therefore, the risk of this adverse




<<<PAGE 2074>>>

Thrombocytopenia Decrease dose if clinically symptomatic (i.e.,
bruising, bleeding gums)
Thrombocytopenia more likely with valproate
levels ≥110 µg/mL (women) and ≥135 µg/mL
(men)
Nevertheless, if symptoms of lethargy, malaise, anorexia, nausea and
vomiting, edema, and abdominal pain occur in a person treated with
valproate, the clinician must consider the possibility of severe hepatotoxicity.
A modest increase in liver function test results does not correlate with the
development of severe hepatotoxicity. Rare cases of pancreatitis have been
reported; they occur most often in the first 6 months of treatment, and the
condition occasionally results in death. The pancreatic function can be
assessed and followed by serum amylase concentrations. Other potentially
severe consequences of treatment include hyperammonemia-induced
encephalopathy and thrombocytopenia. Thrombocytopenia and platelet
dysfunction occur most commonly at high dosages and result in the
prolongation of bleeding times.
There are multiple concerns regarding the use of valproate during
pregnancy. Women who require valproate therapy should, therefore, inform
their physicians if they intend to become pregnant. First-trimester use of
valproate has been associated with a 3 to 5 percent risk of neural tube defects,
as well as an increased risk of other malformations affecting the heart and
other organ systems. Multiple reports have also indicated that in utero
exposure to valproate may negatively affect cognitive development in
children of mothers who take valproate during pregnancy. They have lower
IQ scores at age 6 years compared with those exposed to other antiepileptic
drugs. Fetal valproate exposure has dose-dependent associations with reduced
cognitive abilities across a range of domains at 6 years of age. Valproate
exposure may also increase the risk of autistic spectrum disorder.
Valproate is also associated with teratogenicity, most notably neural tube
defects (e.g., spina bifida). The risk is about 1 to 4 percent of all women who
take valproate during the first trimester of pregnancy. The risk of valproateinduced neural tube defects can be reduced with daily folic acid supplements
(1 to 4 mg a day). All women with childbearing potential who take the drug




<<<PAGE 2075>>>

should be given folic acid supplements. Infants breastfed by mothers taking
valproate develop serum valproate concentrations 1 to 10 percent of maternal
serum concentrations, but no data suggest that this poses a risk to the infant.
Valproate is not contraindicated in nursing mothers. We should avoid this
drug in patients with hepatic diseases. Valproate may be especially
problematic for adolescents and young women. Cases of polycystic ovarian
disease have been reported in women using valproate. Even when the full
syndromal criteria for this syndrome are not met, many of these women
develop menstrual irregularities, hair loss, and hirsutism. These effects are
thought to result from a metabolic syndrome that is driven by insulin
resistance and hyperinsulinemia.
The common adverse effects associated with valproate (Table 21-33) are
those affecting the GI system, such as nausea, vomiting, dyspepsia, and
diarrhea. The GI effects are generally most common in the first month of
treatment, significantly if the dosage is increased rapidly. Unbuffered
valproic acid (Depakene) is more likely to cause GI symptoms than the
enteric-coated “sprinkle” or the delayed-release divalproex sodium
formulations. Other common adverse effects involve the nervous system,
such as sedation, ataxia, dysarthria, and tremor. Valproate-induced tremor
may respond well to treatment with β-adrenergic receptor antagonists or
gabapentin. Treatment of the other neurologic adverse effects usually requires
lowering the valproate dosage.
Weight gain is a common adverse effect, especially in long-term treatment,
and can best be treated by strict limitation of caloric intake. Hair loss may
occur in 5 to 10 percent of all persons treated, and rare cases of complete loss
of body hair have been reported. Some clinicians have recommended
treatment of valproate-associated hair loss with vitamin supplements that
contain zinc and selenium. About 5 to 40 percent of persons experience a
persistent but clinically insignificant elevation in liver transaminases up to
three times the upper limit of normal, which is usually asymptomatic and
resolves after discontinuation of the drug. High dosages of valproate (above
1,000 mg a day) may rarely produce mild to moderate hyponatremia, most
likely because of some degree of the syndrome of secretion of inappropriate
antidiuretic hormone, which is reversible upon lowering of the dosage.
Overdoses of valproate can lead to coma and death.




<<<PAGE 2077>>>

depressant (e.g., alcohol), and increased severity of extrapyramidal
symptoms, which usually responds to treatment with antiparkinsonian drugs.
Valproate can usually be safely combined with carbamazepine or SDAs.
Perhaps the most worrisome interaction of valproate and a psychotropic drug
involves lamotrigine. Since the approval of lamotrigine for the treatment of
bipolar disorder, it is more likely that patients will be treated with both
agents. Valproate more than doubles lamotrigine concentrations, increasing
the risk of a severe rash (Stevens–Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal
necrolysis).
The plasma concentrations of carbamazepine, diazepam (Valium),
amitriptyline (Elavil), nortriptyline (Pamelor), and phenobarbital (Luminal)
may also be increased when these drugs are coadministered with valproate.
Also, the plasma concentrations of phenytoin (Dilantin) and desipramine
(Norpramin) may be decreased when they are combined with valproate. The
plasma concentrations of valproate may be decreased when the drug is
coadministered with carbamazepine and may be increased when
coadministered with guanfacine (Tenex), amitriptyline, or fluoxetine
(Prozac). Valproate can be displaced from plasma proteins by carbamazepine,
diazepam, and aspirin. Persons who are treated with anticoagulants (e.g.,
aspirin and warfarin [Coumadin]) should also be monitored when valproate
use is initiated to assess the development of any undesired augmentation of
the anticoagulation effects. Interactions of valproate with other drugs are
listed in Table 21-34.
Table 21-34
Interactions of Valproate with Other Drugs
Drug

Interactions Reported with Valproate

Lithium

Increased tremor

Antipsychotics

Increased sedation; increased extrapyramidal
effects; delirium and stupor (single report)

Clozapine

Increased sedation; confusional syndrome (single
report)

Carbamazepine Acute psychosis (single report); ataxia, nausea,




<<<PAGE 2078>>>

lethargy (single report); may decrease valproate
serum concentrations
Antidepressants Amitriptyline and fluoxetine may increase valproate
serum concentrations
Diazepam

Serum concentration increased by valproate

Clonazepam

Absence status (rare; reported only in patients with
preexisting epilepsy)

Phenytoin

Serum concentration decreased by valproate

Phenobarbital

Serum concentration increased by valproate;
increased sedation

Other CNS
depressants

Increased sedation

Anticoagulants

Possible potentiation of effect

CNS, central nervous system.

Laboratory Interferences
Valproate may cause a laboratory increase of serum-free fatty acids.
Valproate metabolites may produce a false-positive test result for urinary
ketones as well as falsely abnormal thyroid function test results.
Table 21-35
Recommended Laboratory Tests during Valproate Therapy
Before Treatment
Standard chemistry screen with special attention to liver function
tests
CBC, including WBC and platelet count
During Treatment
Liver function tests at 1 mo; then every 6–24 mo if no
abnormalities are found.
Complete blood count with platelet count at 1 mo; then every 6–
24 mo if findings are normal.




<<<PAGE 2079>>>

If Liver Function Test Results Become Abnormal
Mild transaminase elevation (less than three times normal):
monitoring every 1–2 wk; if stable and patient is responding
to valproate, results are monitored monthly to every 3 mo.
Pronounced transaminase elevation (more than three times
normal): dosage reduction or discontinuation of valproate;
increase dose or rechallenge if transaminases normalize and
if the patient is a valproate responder.
CBC, complete blood count; WBC, white blood cell.

Dosage and Clinical Guidelines
When starting valproate therapy, a baseline hepatic panel, CBC and platelet
counts, and pregnancy testing should be ordered. Additional testing should
include amylase and coagulation studies if baseline pancreatic disease or
coagulopathy is suspected. In addition to baseline laboratory tests, hepatic
transaminase concentrations should be obtained 1 month after initiation of
therapy and every 6 to 24 months after that. However, because even frequent
monitoring may not predict severe organ toxicity, it is more prudent to
reinforce the need for prompt evaluation of any illnesses when reviewing the
instructions with patients. Asymptomatic elevation of transaminase
concentrations up to three times the upper limit of normal are typical and do
not require any change in dosage. Table 21-35 lists the recommended
laboratory tests for valproate treatment.
Valproate is available in several formulations (Table 21-36). For the
treatment of acute mania, an oral loading strategy of initiation with 20 to 30
mg/kg a day can be used to accelerate the control of symptoms. This strategy
is usually well tolerated but can cause excessive sedation and tremor in
elderly persons. Agitated behavior can be rapidly stabilized with IV infusion
of valproate. If acute mania is absent, it is best to initiate drug treatment
gradually to minimize the common adverse effects of nausea, vomiting, and
sedation. The dose on the first day should be 250 mg administered with a
meal. The dosage can be raised to 250 mg orally three times daily for over 3
to 6 days. The plasma concentrations can be assessed in the morning before
the first daily dose is administered. Therapeutic plasma concentrations for the
control of seizures range between 50 and 100 µg/mL. It is reasonable to use




<<<PAGE 2080>>>

the same range for the treatment of mental disorders; most of the controlled
studies have used 50 to 125 µg/mL. Most persons attain therapeutic plasma
concentrations on a dosage between 1,200 and 1,500 mg a day in divided
doses. After a person’s symptoms are well controlled, the full daily dose can
be taken all at once before sleep.
Table 21-36
Valproate Preparations Available in the United States
Generic
Name

Trade Name, Time to Peak
Form (Doses)

Valproate
sodium
injection

Depacon
injection
(100-mg
valproic
acid/mL)

Valproic acid Depakene,
syrup (250
mg/5 mL)
Depakene,
capsules
(250 mg)

1 hr

1–2 hr

1–2 hr

Divalproex
sodium

Depakote,
3–8 hr
delayedreleased
tablets (125,
250, 500
mg)

Divalproex
sodiumcoated
particles
in

Depakote,
sprinkle
capsules
(125 mg)

Compared with divalproex tablets,
divalproex sprinkle has earlier onset
and slower absorption, with slightly
lower peak plasma concentration




<<<PAGE 2081>>>

capsules
Divalproex
Depakote ER
sodium
(250, 500
extendedmg)
release

4–17 hr

LAMOTRIGINE
Lamotrigine (Lamictal) was developed as a result of screening folate
antagonists as anticonvulsants. Lamotrigine proved effective in several
animal models of epilepsy, was developed as an antiepileptic drug, and was
marketed for the adjunctive treatment of partial seizures in the United States
in 1995. Initial, postmarketing, open, clinical experience suggested efficacy
in a variety of neurologic and psychiatric conditions, coupled with good
tolerability (aside from the risk of rash). Later, double-blind, placebocontrolled studies revealed that lamotrigine was useful for some, but not all,
of the neurologic and psychiatric conditions reported in open studies.
Therefore, lamotrigine appeared effective as a maintenance treatment for
bipolar disorder and was approved for the maintenance treatment of bipolar I
disorder in 2003. Lamotrigine also appeared to have potential utility in acute
bipolar depression. However, the magnitude of the effect was too modest to
yield consistently superior performance compared with placebo, and hence
lamotrigine did not receive approval for the treatment of acute bipolar
depression.
Similarly, limited data suggested that lamotrigine had potential utility in
rapid-cycling bipolar disorder. Lamotrigine did not appear to be as effective
as the primary intervention in acute mania. Thus, lamotrigine has emerged as
an agent that appears to “stabilize mood from below” in the sense that it may
maximally impact the depressive component of bipolar disorders.
Pharmacologic Actions
Lamotrigine is wholly absorbed, has a bioavailability of 98 percent, and has a
steady-state plasma half-life of 25 hours. However, the rate of metabolism of
lamotrigine varies over a sixfold range, depending on which other drugs are
administered concomitantly. Dosing is escalated slowly to twice-a-day




<<<PAGE 2083>>>

development of a life-threatening rash or permanent disfiguration.
Estimates of the rate of severe rash vary, depending on the source of the
data. In some studies, the incidence of severe rashes was 0.08 percent in adult
patients receiving lamotrigine as initial monotherapy and 0.13 percent in
adult patients receiving lamotrigine as adjunctive therapy. German registry
data, based on clinical practice, suggest that the risk of rash may be as low as
1 in 5,000 patients. The appearance of any rash necessitates immediate
discontinuation of drug administration.
It is known that the likelihood of a rash increases if the recommended
starting dose and speed of dose increase exceed what is recommended.
Concomitant administration of valproic acid also increases risk and should be
avoided if possible. If valproate is used, a more conservative dosing regimen
is followed. Children and adolescents younger than age 16 years appear to be
more susceptible to rash with lamotrigine. If patients miss more than 4
consecutive days of lamotrigine treatment, they need to restart therapy at the
initial starting dose and titrate upward as if they had not already been on the
medication.
Laboratory Testing
There is no proven correlation between lamotrigine blood concentrations and
either antiseizure effects or efficacy in bipolar disorders. Laboratory tests are
not useful in predicting the occurrence of adverse events.
Drug Interactions
Lamotrigine has significant, well-characterized drug interactions involving
other anticonvulsants. The most potentially serious lamotrigine drug
interaction involves concurrent use of valproic acid, which doubles serum
lamotrigine concentrations. Lamotrigine decreases the plasma concentration
of valproic acid by 25 percent. Sertraline (Zoloft) also increases plasma
lamotrigine concentrations, but to a lesser extent than does valproic acid.
Lamotrigine concentrations are decreased by 40 to 50 percent with
concomitant administration of carbamazepine, phenytoin, or phenobarbital.
Combinations of lamotrigine and other anticonvulsants have complex effects
on the time of peak plasma concentration and the plasma half-life of
lamotrigine.




<<<PAGE 2085>>>

stabilizer useful in the treatment and prevention of both phases of bipolar
affective disorder. A long-acting sustained release formulation (Equetro) was
approved by the U.S. FDA for the treatment of acute mania in 2002.
Table 21-37
Lamotrigine Dosing (mg/day)
Treatment

Weeks 1–2

Weeks
3–4

Weeks 4–5

Lamotrigine
monotherapy

25

50

100–200 (200
maximum)

Lamotrigine +
carbamazepine

50

100

200–400 (400
maximum)

Lamotrigine +
valproate

25 every other 25
day

50–100 (100
maximum)

An analog of carbamazepine, oxcarbazepine (Trileptal), was marketed as
an antiseizure medication in the United States in 2000. Previously it was used
as a treatment for pediatric epilepsy in Europe since 1990. Because of its
similarity to carbamazepine, many clinicians began to use it as a treatment for
patients with bipolar disorder. Despite some reports that oxcarbazepine has
mood-stabilizing properties, this has not been confirmed in large, placebocontrolled trials.
Carbamazepine
Pharmacologic Actions. The absorption of carbamazepine is slow and
unpredictable. Food enhances absorption. Peak plasma concentrations are
reached 2 to 8 hours after a single dose, and steady-state levels are reached
after 2 to 4 days on a steady dosage. It is 70 to 80 percent protein-bound. The
half-life of carbamazepine ranges from 18 to 54 hours, with an average of 26
hours. However, with chronic administration, the half-life of carbamazepine
decreases to an average of 12 hours. This results from the induction of
hepatic CYP450 enzymes by carbamazepine, specifically the autoinduction
of carbamazepine metabolism. The induction of hepatic enzymes reaches its




<<<PAGE 2091>>>

Cyclosporine
Desipramine
Dicumarol
Doxepin
Doxycycline
Ethosuximide
Felbamate
Fentanyl
Fluphenazine
Haloperidol
Hormonal contraceptives
Imipramine
Lamotrigine
Methadone
Methsuximide
Methylprednisolone
Nimodipine
Pancuronium
Phensuximide
Phenytoin
Primidone
Theophylline
Valproate
Warfarin
Carbamazepine may increase drug
plasma concentrations of
Clomipramine
Phenytoin
Primidone

Fluoxetine
Fluvoxamine
Gemfibrozil
Itraconazole
Ketoconazole
Isoniazida
Itraconazole
Lamotrigine
Loratadine
Macrolides
Nefazodone
Nicotinamide
Propoxyphene
Terfenadine
Troleandomycin
Valproatea
Verapamil
Viloxazine
Drugs that may decrease
carbamazepine plasma
concentrations
Carbamazepine
(autoinduction)
Cisplatin
Doxorubicin HCl
Felbamate
Phenobarbital
Phenytoin
Primidone
Rifampinb
Theophylline
Valproate

aIncreased concentrations of the active 10,11-epoxide.
bDecreased concentrations of carbamazepine and increased concentrations of the 10,11-

epoxide.
Table by Carlos A. Zarate, Jr., M.D. and Mauricio Tohen, M.D.




<<<PAGE 2267>>>

Benedetti A, Lattanzi L, Pini S, Musetti L, Dell’Osso L. Oxcarbazepine as
add-on treatment in patients with bipolar manic, mixed, or depressive
episode. J Affect Disord. 2004;79:273–277.
Bialer M. Extended-release formulations for the treatment of epilepsy. CNS
Drugs. 2007;21:765–774.
Bowden CL, Swann AC, Calabrese JR, Rubenfaer LM, Wozniak PJ.
Depakote ER Mania Study Group. A randomized, placebo-controlled,
multicenter study of divalproex sodium extended release in the treatment
of acute mania. J Clin Psychiatry. 2006;67:1501.
Bray GA, Hollander P, Klein S, Kushner R, Levy B. A 6-month randomized,
placebo-controlled, dose-ranging trial of topiramate for weight loss in
obesity. Obes Res. 2003;11(6):722–733.
Calabrese JR, Huffman RF, White RL. Lamotrigine in the acute treatment of
bipolar depression: results of five double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical
trials. Bipolar Disord. 2008;10:323–333.
Chen PS, Wang CC, Bortner CD, Peng GS, Wu X, Pang H. Valproic acid and
other histone deacetylase inhibitors induce microglial apoptosis and
attenuate lipopolysaccharide-induced dopaminergic neurotoxicity.
Neuroscience. 2007;149:203–212.
Chustecka Z. Hydralazine and valproate appear to overcome resistance to
chemotherapy. Ann Oncol. 2007;18:1529.
Cipriani A, Hawton K, Stockton S, Geddes JR. Lithium in the prevention of
suicide in mood disorders: updated systematic review and meta-analysis.
BMJ. 2013;346: f3646.
Cohen LS, Friedman JM, Jefferson JW, Johnson EM, Weiner ML. A
reevaluation of risk of in utero exposure to lithium. JAMA. 1994;271:146–
150.
Collins J, McFarland B. Divalproex, lithium and suicide among medicaid
patients with bipolar disorder. J Affect Dis. 2008;107:23–28.
Cousins DA, Aribisala B, Ferrier I, Blamire AM. Lithium, gray matter, and
magnetic resonance imaging signal. Biol Psychiatry. 2013;73(7):652–657.
Crofford LJ, Rowbotham MC, Mease PJ, Russell IJ, Dworkin RH. Pregabalin
for the treatment of fibromyalgia syndrome: results of a randomized,
double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Arthritis Rheum. 2005;52(4):1264.
Delvendahl I, Lindemann H, Heidegger T, Normann C, Ziemann U, Mall V.
Effects of lamotrigine on human motor cortex plasticity. Clin


