<<<PAGE 1249>>>

sweating, male
sexual
dysfunction
Desvenlafaxine

50–100

Dry mouth,
dizziness,
nausea,
sweating

None

Duloxetine

30–120

Nausea, dry mouth, None
constipation,
insomnia, male
sexual
dysfunction

Levomilnacipran

20–80

Nausea, dry mouth, None
headaches, male
sexual
dysfunction

Other Second-Generation and Novel Antidepressants
Agomelatinea

25–50

None

None

Bupropion

150–450

Insomnia, dry
mouth, nausea

Headaches

Mirtazapine

15–60

Dry mouth,
constipation,
increased
appetite, weight
gain

Somnolence

Moclobemidea

300–600

None

None

Vilazodone

10–40

Diarrhea, nausea,
headaches

None

Vortioxetine

10–20

Nausea

None

aNot routinely available in the United States.




<<<PAGE 1305>>>

of severe anxiety symptoms. In those cases, a short-term benzodiazepine,
such as lorazepam or alprazolam, is helpful in the short term. Concurrently,
an SSRI should be started and slowly increased.
For panic disorder, SSRIs or the serotonin–norepinephrine reuptake
inhibitor (SNRI) venlafaxine are first-line options. Tricyclic antidepressants
or MAOIs are effective but less preferably given their side effects. Other
agents, such as mirtazapine, are other second-line options. As mentioned, the
benzodiazepines are effective options but mainly used for short-term use or
exacerbations. Long-term antidepressant therapy is useful for preventing
relapse, with studies suggesting that the beneficial effects last for up to 1 to 3
years. When appropriate, maintenance therapy should be discontinued very
slowly.
For generalized anxiety disorder, the approach is similar, with SSRIs and
SNRIs being the first-line treatments. Reasonable alternatives if those are not
effective include agomelatine, pregabalin, buspirone, and quetiapine.
For social anxiety disorder, the approach is similar to those already
described, with SSRIs and SNRIs being the first-line choice. Pregabalin and
clonazepam also have strong evidence, although the same caveats for other
benzodiazepines apply to clonazepam. Phenelzine is effective as well but is
rarely used because of the side effects. Tricyclic antidepressants, buspirone,
and quetiapine are not recommended owing to their side effects. As noted
above, β-blockers may be useful for performance anxiety. However, their use
does not appear to generalize to other types of social anxiety.
Table 8-6
Evidence-Based Recommendations for Monotherapy of
Anxiety Disorders
Anxiety Disorders
Classes and
Agents

GAD

PD

SAD

SSRIs

First line

First line

First line

SNRIs

First line

First line

First line

TCAs

Second line

Second line

Not




<<<PAGE 1306>>>

recommended
MAOIs

Insufficient
evidence

Second line

Second line

RIMA-Moclobemide Insufficient
evidence

Insufficient
evidence

Second Line

Other Psychotropics Second line
—Agomelatine,
Buspirone,
Mirtazapine

Second line

Second line

Benzodiazepines

Second line

Second line

Second line

Atypical
Second line
Antipsychotics—
Quetiapine

Insufficient
evidence

Not
recommended

Anticonvulsant—
Pregabalin

Insufficient
evidence

Second line

Second line

Note: Beta-adrenergic blocking agents are recommended only for performance anxiety.
RIMA, reversible monoamine oxidase inhibitor; GAD, generalized anxiety disorder; PD, panic
disorder; SAD, social anxiety disorder.

In the case of specific phobia, psychotherapies, particularly behavioral
therapies, are the first-line choice. SSRIs may be helpful, although there are
few studies of SSRIs for this disorder.
For agoraphobia, the main goal of pharmacotherapy is to treat the panic
attacks that are usually comorbid. Early studies did not support the use of
medications for “pure” agoraphobia; however, there has been little research
since.
Psychosocial Therapies
There is strong support for a variety of psychosocial therapies for anxiety
disorders, including cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT), behavioral
therapies, and interpersonal therapy. Studies of CBT suggest it has a
substantial effect on generalized anxiety disorder, panic disorder, and social
anxiety disorder, although this evidence is tempered by concerns about




<<<PAGE 2149>>>

melatonin may inhibit ovarian function, and for that reason, it has been
evaluated as a contraceptive, but with inconclusive results.
Drug Interactions. As a dietary supplement preparation, exogenous
melatonin is not regulated by the FDA and has not been subjected to the same
type of drug interaction studies that were performed for ramelteon. Caution is
suggested in coadministering melatonin with blood thinners (e.g., warfarin
[Coumadin], aspirin, and heparin), antiseizure medications, and medications
that lower BP.
Laboratory Interference. Melatonin is not known to interfere with any
commonly used clinical laboratory tests.
Dosage and Administration. Over-the-counter melatonin is available in
the following formulations: 1-, 2.5-, 3-, and 5-mg capsules; 1-mg/4-mL
liquid; 0.5- and 3-mg lozenges; 2.5-mg sublingual tablets; and 1-, 2-, and 3mg timed-release tablets.
Standard recommendations are to take the desired melatonin dose at
bedtime, but some evidence from clinical trials suggests that dosing up to 2
hours before habitual bedtime may produce a more significant improvement
in sleep onset.
Agomelatine (Valdoxan). Agomelatine is structurally related to melatonin
and is used in Europe as a treatment for MDD. It acts as an agonist at
melatonin (MT1 and MT2) receptors. It also acts as a serotonin antagonist.
Analysis of agomelatine clinical trial data raised serious questions about the
efficacy and safety of the drug. The drug is not being marketed in the United
States.

PRAZOSIN
Prazosin (Minipress) is a quinazoline derivative and one of a new chemical
class of antihypertensives. It is an α1-adrenergic receptor antagonist as
opposed to the drugs mentioned above, which are α2-blockers.
Pharmacologic Actions




<<<PAGE 2259>>>

Vol. 2. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:3253.
Holt A, Berry MD, Boulton AA. On the binding of monoamine oxidase
inhibitors to some sites distinct from the MAO active site, and effects
thereby elicited. Neurotoxicology. 2004;25:251–266.
Hu X-Z, Rush AJ, Charney D, Wilson AF, Sorant AJM. Association between
a functional serotonin transporter promoter polymorphism and citalopram
treatment in adult outpatients with major depression. Arch Gen Psychiatry.
2007;64:783–792.
Joffe RT. Thyroid hormones. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan
& Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Vol. 2.
Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:3248.
Joffe RT, Sokolov ST, Levitt AJ. Lithium and triiodothyronine augmentation
of antidepressants. Can J Psychiatry. 2006;51:791–793.
Johansson P, Almqvist EG, Johansson J-O, Mattsson N, Hansson O, Wallin
A, Blennow K, Zetterberg H, Svensson J. Reduced cerebrospinal fluid
level of thyroxine in patients with Alzheimer’s disease.
Psychoneuroendocrinology. 2013;38(7):
1058–1066.
Kasper S, Corruble E, Hale A, Lemoine P, Montgomery SA, Quera-Salva MA. Antidepressant efficacy of agomelatine versus SSRI/SNRI: results from
a pooled analysis of head-to-head studies without a placebo control. Int
Clin Psychopharmacol. 2013;28(1):12–19.
Keller MB, Trivedi MH, Thase ME, Shelton RC, Kornstein SG, Nemeroff
CB, Friedman ES, Gelenberg AJ, Kocsis JH, Dunner DL, Hirschfeld
RMA, Rothschild AJ, Ferguson JM, Schatzberg AF, Zajecka JM, Pedersen
RD, Yan B, Ahmed S, Musgnung J, Ninan PT. The Prevention of
Recurrent Episodes of Depression with Venlafaxine for Two Years
(PREVENT) Study: outcomes from the 2-year and combined maintenance
phases. J Clin Psychiatry. 2007;68:1246–1256.
Kennedy SH, Holt A, Baker GB. Monoamine oxidase inhibitors. In: Sadock
BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook
of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Vol. 2. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins; 2009:3154.
Khan AA, Kornstein SG. Nefazodone. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P,
eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed.
Vol. 2. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:3164.


