<<<PAGE 415>>>

during clozapine use. Its use is generally limited to treatment-resistant
psychotic patients.
Ziprasidone has receptor-blocking properties at the 5-HT2A and D2
receptor sites and carries little risk of extrapyramidal and antihistaminic
effects. No guidelines exist for its use in autistic children with aggressive and
self-injurious behaviors; clinicians sometimes use it to treat these behaviors
in treatment-resistant children. In studies of its use in adults with
schizophrenia, dose ranges of 40 to 160 mg were effective. Adverse effects
include sedation, dizziness, and lightheadedness. Before using this
medication, the clinician should check an electrocardiogram.
Lithium is efficacious in children with aggression without autism spectrum
disorder, and it is used clinically in the treatment of aggressive or selfinjurious behaviors when antipsychotic medications are not helpful.
Agents Used for Behavioral Impairment in Autism Spectrum
Disorder without Evidence of Efficacy. A double-blind study
investigated the efficacy of amantadine, which blocks N-methyl-D-aspartate
(NMDA) receptors, in the treatment of behavioral disturbance, such as
irritability, aggression, and hyperactivity, in children with autism. Some
researchers have suggested that abnormalities of the glutamatergic system
may contribute to the emergence of autism spectrum disorders. High
glutamate levels occur in children with the formerly labeled Rett syndrome.
In the amantadine study, 47 percent of children on amantadine were
“improved” per their parents, and 37 percent of children on placebo were
rated “improved” by parents in irritability and hyperactivity, although this
difference was not statistically significant. Investigators rated the children on
amantadine “significantly improved” for hyperactivity. A double-blind,
placebo-controlled study of the efficacy of the anticonvulsant lamotrigine on
hyperactivity in children with autism showed high rates of placebo
improvement in ratings of hyperactivity, which were similar to response on
the medication.
Clomipramine is sometimes used but lacks RCTs to provide evidence of
positive results. Fenfluramine, which reduces blood serotonin levels, has also
been used but appears to be ineffective. Improvement does not seem to be
associated with a reduction in blood serotonin levels. Naltrexone, an opioid




<<<PAGE 914>>>

Interventions) demonstrated that naltrexone improves clinical outcomes, and
a Cochrane review of naltrexone concluded that naltrexone was effective in
reducing heavy drinking days. The typical dose is 50 mg/day, and side effects
include mild GI upset and lethargy.
The second medication, acamprosate, antagonizes neuronal overactivity
related to the excitatory neurotransmitter glutamate, at least in part, by acting
as an antagonist to N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptors. Acamprosate
may diminish mild anxiety, mood swings, and other sleep difficulties
associated with the protracted withdrawal syndrome observed after the first 4
to 5 days of abstinence. The typical dose is about 2,000 mg divided into three
doses per day and is associated with relatively mild side effects of GI
problems such as diarrhea.
A third possible drug of interest is the alcohol-sensitizing agent disulfiram.
Disulfiram is given in daily doses of 250 mg before discharging the patient
from the intensive first phase of outpatient rehabilitation or inpatient care.
The goal is to place the patient in a condition in which drinking alcohol
precipitates an uncomfortable physical reaction, including nausea, vomiting,
and a burning sensation in the face and stomach. Few data support
disulfiram’s effectiveness, most likely because patients stop it when they
resume drinking. Many clinicians have stopped routinely prescribing the
agent, partly in recognition of the dangers associated with the drug itself:
mood swings, rare instances of psychosis, the possibility of increased
peripheral neuropathies, the relatively rare occurrence of other significant
neuropathies, and potentially fatal hepatitis. Moreover, we should not give
disulfiram to patients with preexisting heart disease, cerebral thrombosis,
diabetes, and some other conditions, because an alcohol reaction to the
disulfiram could be fatal.
Table 4-15 gives a summary of medications used for alcohol dependence.
Two other medications, while not yet approved for the treatment of alcohol
use disorders, are worth brief mention. Several studies using the
anticonvulsant topiramate have reported improvement in drinking patterns.
Additionally, some data suggest that the 5-HT3 ondansetron might be
beneficial in alcohol use disorder treatment. No evidence exists that
antidepressant medications, such as selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
(SSRIs), lithium, or antipsychotic medications, are significantly effective in




<<<PAGE 916>>>

Medications for Treating Alcohol Dependence

Action

Naltrexone

Acamprosate

Disulfiram

Blocks opioid
receptors,
resulting in
reduced
craving and
reduced
reward in
response to
drinking

Not well
Inhibits
understood.
intermediate
Likely an NMDA
metabolism of
receptor
alcohol,
antagonist and
causing a
positive allosteric
buildup of
modulator of
acetaldehyde
GABAa receptors
and a reaction
of flushing,
sweating,
nausea, and
tachycardia if a
patient drinks
alcohol

Contraindications Currently using Severe renal
Concomitant use
opioids or in
impairment (CrCl
of alcohol or
acute opioid
≤30 mL/min)
alcoholwithdrawal;
containing
anticipated
preparations or
need for
metronidazole;
opioid
coronary artery
analgesics;
disease; severe
acute
myocardial
hepatitis or
disease
liver failure
Precautions

Other hepatic
disease;
renal
impairment;
history of

Moderate renal
High impulsivity—
impairment
likely to drink
(dose
while using it;
adjustment for
psychoses
CrCl between 30
(current or




<<<PAGE 918>>>

dizziness;
headache;
anxiety;
fatigue

headache; back
pain; infection;
flu syndrome;
chills;
somnolence;
decreased libido;
amnesia;
confusion

Examples of drug Opioid
No clinically
interactions
analgesics
relevant
(blocks
interactions
action);
known
yohimbine
(use with
naltrexone
increases
negative drug
effects)

Usual adult
dosage

Amitriptyline;
anticoagulants
such as
warfarin;
diazepam;
isoniazid;
metronidazole;
phenytoin;
theophylline;
warfarin; any
nonprescription
drug-containing
alcohol

Oral dose: 50
Oral dose: 666 mg Oral dose: 250
mg daily
(two 333-mg
mg daily (range
before
tablets) three
125–500 mg)
prescribing:
times daily or, for
before
evaluate for
patients with
prescribing:
possible
moderate renal
warn that the
current opioid
impairment (CrCl
patient should
use; consider
30–50 mL/min),
not take
a urine
reduce to 333
disulfiram for at
toxicology
mg (one tablet)
least 12 hr after
screen for
three times daily
drinking and
opioids,
before
that a
including
prescribing:
disulfiramsynthetic
establish
alcohol reaction




<<<PAGE 948>>>

Opioid antagonists (e.g., naloxone, nalmefene, and naltrexone) bind to the
receptor but do not exert any activity. These medications function as
antagonists—they compete for binding at the receptor with agonists and
partial agonists, and if the dose of the antagonist is high enough, they may
displace the agonist from the receptor and prevent the agonist from binding to
the receptor and exerting any effect. Naloxone reverses an overdose; as it is a
short-acting agent, it can be dosed very accurately without the risk of an
unnecessarily prolonged effect. Naltrexone is a long-acting agent used
following detoxification as a strategy to prevent recurrent physiologic
dependence and relapse.
Overdose Treatment
The first task in overdose treatment is to ensure an adequate airway.
Tracheopharyngeal secretions should be aspirated, and it may be necessary to
insert an airway. The patient should be ventilated mechanically until the
clinicians can give naloxone. Naloxone is administered intravenously at a
slow rate—initially about 0.8 mg per 70 kg of body weight. Signs of
improvement (increased respiratory rate and pupillary dilation) should occur
promptly. In patients physiologically dependent on opioids, too much
naloxone may produce signs of withdrawal. If no response to the initial
dosage occurs, clinicians can repeat the naloxone administration after
intervals of a few minutes. If there is no response after 4 to 5 mg, some think
that nonopioid substances may be contributing to the CNS depression. The
duration of action of naloxone is short compared with that of many opioids,
such as methadone and levomethadyl acetate, and repeated administration
may be required to prevent recurrence of opioid toxicity.
Table 4-22
Substance
and
Non–Substance-Related
Disorders in Opioid Users

Psychiatric




<<<PAGE 958>>>

The endogenous opioids also have significant interactions with other
neuronal systems, such as the dopaminergic and noradrenergic
neurotransmitter systems. Several types of data indicate that the VTA
dopaminergic neurons (which project to the cerebral cortex and the limbic
system) mediate the rewarding properties of opioids.
Heroin, the most commonly abused opioid, is more lipid-soluble than
morphine. It crosses the blood–brain barrier faster and has a more rapid and
pleasurable onset than morphine. First introduced as a treatment for morphine
addiction, heroin is more dependence-producing than morphine. Codeine,
which occurs naturally as about 0.5 percent of the opiate alkaloids in opium,
is absorbed quickly through the GI tract and is subsequently transformed into
morphine in the body. Results of at least one study using positron emission
tomography (PET) have suggested that one effect of all opioids is decreased
cerebral blood flow (CBF) in selected brain regions in persons with opioid
dependence. There is compelling evidence indicating that the endorphins are
involved in other addictions, such as alcoholism, cocaine, and cannabinoid
addiction. The opioid antagonist, naltrexone, has shown value in mitigating
alcohol addiction.
Tolerance and Dependence. Tolerance to all actions of opioid drugs
does not develop uniformly. Tolerance to some actions of opioids can be so
high that a 100-fold increase in dose is required to produce the original effect.
For example, terminally ill cancer patients may need 200 to 300 mg a day of
morphine, whereas a dose of 60 mg can easily be fatal to an opioid-naive
person. The symptoms of opioid withdrawal do not appear unless a person
has been using opioids for a long time or when cessation is particularly
abrupt, as occurs when a person takes an opioid antagonist. The long-term
use of opioids results in changes in the number and sensitivity of opioid
receptors, which mediate at least some of the effects of tolerance and
withdrawal. Although long-term use is associated with increased sensitivity
of dopaminergic, cholinergic, and serotonergic neurons, the effect of opioids
on the noradrenergic neurons is probably the primary mediator of the
symptoms of opioid withdrawal. Short-term use of opioids appears to
decrease the activity of the noradrenergic neurons in the locus ceruleus; longterm use activates a compensatory homeostatic mechanism within the
neurons, and opioid withdrawal results in rebound hyperactivity. This




<<<PAGE 1436>>>

Electroconvulsive therapy (for refractory depression with persistent
melancholic features across all dissociative identity disorder
alters)
Mood stabilizers (more useful for PTSD and anxiety than mood
swings)
Divalproex
Lamotrigine
Oral or intramuscular benzodiazepines
Medications for sleep problems
Low-dose trazodone
Low-dose mirtazapine
Low-dose tricyclic antidepressants
Low-dose neuroleptics
Benzodiazepines (often less helpful for sleep problems in this
population)
Zolpidem
Anticholinergic agents (diphenhydramine, hydroxyzine)
Medications for self-injury, addictions
Naltrexone
Brainwashing
There are no empirical treatment studies of individuals subjected to extreme
coercion applied in the service of indoctrination into a belief system or an
attempt at identity alteration. The basic principles of phased trauma treatment
would seem to provide an organizing framework for their care, as for victims
of other forms of torture. Family and social interventions may be necessary
because of the duress and disruption accompanying the precipitating events
and the social effects of the profound changes in the patient’s attitudes,
behaviors, and beliefs, as well as sequestration from everyday events during
the period of captivity.
Ganser Syndrome
No systematic treatment studies have been conducted, given the rarity of this
condition. In most case reports, the patient has been hospitalized and
provided with a protective and supportive environment. In some instances,




<<<PAGE 2167>>>

long-term detoxification (up to 180 days), and maintenance (treatment
beyond 180 days) of opioid-dependent individuals. For these purposes, it is
only available through designated clinics called methadone maintenance
treatment programs (MMTPs) and in hospitals and prisons. Methadone is a
schedule II drug, which means that specific federal laws and regulations
tightly govern its administration.
Enrollment in a methadone program reduces the risk of death by 70
percent; reduces illicit use of opioids and other substances of abuse; reduces
criminal activity; reduces the risk of infectious diseases of all types, most
importantly HIV and hepatitis B and C infection; and in pregnant women,
reduces the risk of fetal and neonatal morbidity and mortality. The use of
methadone maintenance frequently requires lifelong treatment.
Some opioid-dependence treatment programs use a stepwise detoxification
protocol in which a person addicted to heroin switches first to the potent
agonist methadone; then to the weaker agonist buprenorphine; and finally to
maintenance on an opioid receptor antagonist, such as naltrexone (ReVia).
This approach minimizes the appearance of opioid withdrawal effects, which,
if they occur, are mitigated with clonidine (Catapres). However, compliance
with opioid receptor antagonist treatment is low outside of settings using
intensive cognitive-behavioral techniques. In contrast, noncompliance with
methadone maintenance precipitates opioid withdrawal symptoms, which
serve to reinforce the use of methadone and make cognitive-behavioral
therapy less than essential. Thus, some well-motivated, socially integrated
former heroin addicts can use methadone for years without participation in a
psychosocial support program.
Data pooled from many reports indicate that methadone is more effective
when taken at dosages above 60 mg a day. The analgesic effects of
methadone are sometimes used in the management of chronic pain when less
addictive agents are ineffective.
PREGNANCY. Methadone maintenance, combined with effective psychosocial

services and regular obstetric monitoring, significantly improves obstetric
and neonatal outcomes for women addicted to heroin. Enrollment of a heroinaddicted pregnant woman in such a maintenance program reduces the risk of
malnutrition, infection, preterm labor, spontaneous abortion, preeclampsia,
eclampsia, abruptio placenta, and septic thrombophlebitis.




<<<PAGE 2175>>>

Naltrexone (Revia, Depade) and naloxone (Narcan) are competitive opioid
antagonists. They bind to opioid receptors without causing their activation.
Because these drugs induce opioid withdrawal effects in people using full
opioid agonists, these drugs are classified as opioid antagonists.
Naltrexone is the most widely used of these drugs. It has a relatively long
half-life, is orally effective, is not associated with dysphoria, and is
administered once daily. Naloxone, which predated naltrexone to treat
narcotic overdose, became less widely used for preventing relapse to opiate
use in detoxified opiate addicts. Since its introduction, naltrexone has been
tried for the treatment of a wide range of psychiatric disorders, including,
among others, eating disorders, autism, self-injurious behavior, cocaine
dependence, gambling, and alcoholism. Naltrexone was approved for the
treatment of alcohol dependence in 1994. Several generic formulations are
also available. An extended-release, once-a-month injectable suspension
(Vivitrol) was also approved in 2006. Nalmefene (Revex) is indicated for the
complete or partial reversal of opioid drug effects and in the management of
known or suspected opioid overdose. An oral formulation of nalmefene is
available in some countries but not in the United States. Nalmefene (Revex,
Selincro) is an opioid receptor antagonist that is sometimes used in the
management of alcohol dependence.
Pharmacologic Actions
The GI tract rapidly absorbs oral opioid receptor antagonists. However,
because of first-pass hepatic metabolism, only 60 percent of a dose of
naltrexone and 40 to 50 percent of a dose of nalmefene reach the systemic
circulation unchanged. Peak concentrations of naltrexone and its active
metabolite, 6-β-naltrexol, are achieved within 1 hour of ingestion. The halflife of naltrexone is 1 to 3 hours, and the half-life of 6-β-naltrexol is 13 hours.
Peak concentrations of nalmefene are achieved in about 1 to 2 hours, and the
half-life is 8 to 10 hours. Clinically, a single dose of naltrexone effectively
blocks the rewarding effects of opioids for 72 hours. Traces of 6-β-naltrexol
may linger for up to 125 hours after a single dose.
Naltrexone and nalmefene are competitive antagonists of opioid receptors.
Understanding the pharmacology of opioid receptors can explain the
difference in adverse effects caused by naltrexone and nalmefene. Opioid




<<<PAGE 2176>>>

receptors in the body are typed pharmacologically as µ, κ, or δ. Whereas
activation of the κ- and δ-receptors is thought to reinforce opioid and alcohol
consumption centrally, activation of µ-receptors is more closely associated
with central and peripheral antiemetic effects. Because naltrexone is a
relatively weak antagonist of κ- and δ-receptors and a potent µ-receptor
antagonist, dosages of naltrexone that effectively reduce opioid and alcohol
consumption also strongly block µ-receptors and, therefore, may cause
nausea. Nalmefene, in contrast, is an equally potent antagonist of all three
opioid receptor types, and dosages of nalmefene that effectively reduce
opioid and alcohol consumption have no significantly increased effect on µreceptors. Thus, nalmefene is associated clinically with few GI adverse
effects.
Naloxone has the highest affinity for the µ-receptor but is a competitive
antagonist at the µ-, κ-, and δ-receptors.
Whereas the effects of opioid receptor antagonists on opioid use are easily
understood in terms of competitive inhibition of opioid receptors, the effects
of opioid receptor antagonists on alcohol dependence are less
straightforward. That likely relates to the fact that the desire for and the
effects of alcohol consumption appear to be regulated by several
neurotransmitter systems, both opioid and nonopioid.
Therapeutic Indications
The combination of a cognitive-behavioral program plus the use of opioid
receptor antagonists is more successful than either the cognitive-behavioral
program or the use of opioid receptor antagonists alone. Naloxone is used as
a screening test to ensure that the patient is opioid-free before the induction
of therapy with naltrexone (see “Naloxone Challenge Test” in Table 21-53).
Table 21-53
Naloxone (Narcan) Challenge Test
The naloxone challenge test should not be performed in a patient
showing clinical signs or symptoms of opioid withdrawal or in a
patient whose urine contains opioids. The naloxone challenge test
may be administered by either the intravenous (IV) or the




<<<PAGE 2177>>>

subcutaneous route.
IV challenge: After appropriate screening of the patient, 0.8 mg of
naloxone should be drawn into a sterile syringe. If the IV route of
administration is selected, 0.2 mg of naloxone should be injected,
and while the needle is still in the patient’s vein, the patient should
be observed for 30 s for evidence of withdrawal signs or
symptoms. If there is no evidence of withdrawal, the remaining 0.6
mg of naloxone should be injected and the patient observed for an
additional 20 min for signs and symptoms of withdrawal.
Subcutaneous challenge: If the subcutaneous route is selected, 0.8
mg should be administered subcutaneously and the patient
observed for signs and symptoms of withdrawal for 20 min.
Conditions and technique for observation of patient: During the
appropriate period of observation, the patient’s vital signs should
be monitored, and the patient should be monitored for signs of
withdrawal. It is also important to question the patient carefully.
The signs and symptoms of opioid withdrawal include, but are not
limited to, the following:
Withdrawal signs: Stuffiness or running nose, tearing, yawning,
sweating, tremor, vomiting, or piloerection
Withdrawal symptoms: Feeling of temperature change, joint or
bone and muscle pain, abdominal cramps, and formication
(feeling of bugs crawling under skin)
Interpretation of the challenge: Warning—the elicitation of the
enumerated signs or symptoms indicates a potential risk for the
subject, and naltrexone should not be administered. If no signs or
symptoms of withdrawal are observed, elicited, or reported,
naltrexone may be administered. If there is any doubt in the
observer’s mind that the patient is not in an opioid-free state or is
in continuing withdrawal, naltrexone should be withheld for 24 hr
and the challenge repeated.
Opioid Dependence. Patients in detoxification programs are usually
weaned from potent opioid agonists such as heroin over days to weeks,
during which emergent adrenergic withdrawal effects are treated as needed




<<<PAGE 2178>>>

with clonidine (Catapres). A serial protocol is sometimes used in which
potent agonists are gradually replaced by weaker agonists followed by mixed
agonist–antagonists and then finally by pure antagonists. For example, an
abuser of the potent agonist heroin would switch first to the weaker agonist
methadone (Dolophine), then to the partial agonist buprenorphine (Buprenex)
or levomethadyl acetate (ORLAAM)—commonly called LAAM—and
finally, after a 7- to 10-day washout period, to a pure antagonist, such as
naltrexone or nalmefene. However, even with gradual detoxification, some
persons continue to experience mild adverse effects or opioid withdrawal
symptoms for the first several weeks of treatment with naltrexone.
As the opioid receptor agonist potency diminishes, so do the adverse
consequences of discontinuing the drug. Thus, because there are no
pharmacologic barriers to discontinuation of pure opioid receptor antagonists,
the social environment and frequent cognitive-behavioral intervention
become significant factors supporting continued opioid abstinence. Because
of poorly tolerated adverse symptoms, most persons not simultaneously
enrolled in a cognitive-behavioral program stop taking opioid receptor
antagonists within 3 months. Compliance with the administration of an opioid
receptor antagonist regimen can also be increased with participation in a
well-conceived voucher program.
Issues of medication compliance should be a central focus of treatment. If
a person with a history of opioid addiction stops taking a pure opioid receptor
antagonist, the person’s risk of relapse into opioid abuse is exceedingly high,
because the reintroduction of a potent opioid agonist would yield a very
rewarding subjective “high.” In contrast, compliant persons do not develop
tolerance to the therapeutic benefits of naltrexone even if it is administered
continuously for 1 year or longer. Individuals may undergo several relapses
and remissions before achieving long-term abstinence.
Persons taking opioid receptor antagonists should also be warned that
sufficiently high dosages of opioid agonists can overcome the receptor
antagonism of naltrexone or nalmefene, which may lead to hazardous and
unpredictable levels of receptor activation (see “Precautions and Adverse
Reactions”).
Rapid Detoxification. The recommended period of opioid abstinence
before starting opioid receptor antagonists is 7 to 10 days. However, to avoid




<<<PAGE 2179>>>

this, rapid detoxification protocols have been developed. Continuous
administration of adjunct clonidine—to reduce the adrenergic withdrawal
symptoms—and adjunct benzodiazepines, such as oxazepam (Serax)—to
reduce muscle spasms and insomnia—can permit the use of oral opioid
receptor antagonists on the first day of opioid cessation. Detoxification can
thus be completed within 48 to 72 hours, at which point opioid receptor
antagonist maintenance is initiated. Moderately severe withdrawal symptoms
may be experienced on the first day, but they taper off rapidly after that.
Because of the potential hypotensive effects of clonidine, the BP of
persons undergoing rapid detoxification must be closely monitored for the
first 8 hours. Outpatient rapid detoxification settings must therefore be
adequately prepared to administer emergency care.
The main advantage of rapid detoxification is that the transition from
opioid abuse to maintenance treatment occurs over just 2 or 3 days. The
completion of detoxification in as little time as possible minimizes the risk
that the person will relapse into opioid abuse during the detoxification
protocol.
Alcohol Use Disorder. Opioid receptor antagonists are also used as
adjuncts to cognitive-behavioral programs for the treatment of alcohol use
disorder. Opioid receptor antagonists reduce alcohol craving and alcohol
consumption, and they ameliorate the severity of relapses. Concomitant
opioid receptor antagonist treatment added to an effective cognitivebehavioral program may halve the risk of relapse into heavy alcohol
consumption.
The newer agent, nalmefene, has several potential pharmacologic and
clinical advantages over its predecessor, naltrexone, for the treatment of
alcohol use disorder. Whereas naltrexone may cause reversible transaminase
elevations in persons who take dosages of 300 mg a day (which is six times
the recommended dosage for treatment of alcohol and opioid dependence [50
mg a day]), nalmefene has not been associated with any hepatotoxicity.
Clinically effective dosages of naltrexone are discontinued by 10 to 15
percent of persons because of adverse effects, most commonly nausea. In
contrast, discontinuation of nalmefene because of an adverse event is rare at
the clinically effective dosage of 20 mg a day and in the range of 10 percent
at excessive dosages—that is, 80 mg a day. Because of its pharmacokinetic




<<<PAGE 2180>>>

profile, a given dosage of nalmefene may also produce a more sustained
opioid antagonist effect than does naltrexone.
The efficacy of opioid receptor antagonists in reducing alcohol craving
may be augmented with an SSRI, although data from large trials are needed
to assess this potential synergistic effect more fully.
Precautions and Adverse Reactions
Because opioid receptor antagonists are used for sustaining a drug-free state
after opioid detoxification, great care must be taken to ensure that an
adequate washout period elapses. This detox requires at least 5 days for a
short-acting opioid such as heroin and at least 10 days for longer-acting
opioids such as methadone—after the last dose of opioids and before the first
dose of an opioid receptor antagonist is taken. Self-report and urine
toxicology screens should determine the opioid-free state. If any question
persists of whether opioids are in the body despite a negative urine screen
result, then a naloxone challenge test should be performed. Naloxone
challenge is used because its opioid antagonism lasts less than 1 hour, but
those of naltrexone and nalmefene may persist for more than 24 hours. Thus,
any withdrawal effects elicited by naloxone will be relatively short-lived (see
“Dosage and Clinical Guidelines”). Symptoms of acute opioid withdrawal
include drug craving, a feeling of temperature change, musculoskeletal pain,
and GI distress. Signs of opioid withdrawal include confusion, drowsiness,
vomiting, and diarrhea. Naltrexone and nalmefene should not be taken if
naloxone infusion causes any signs of opioid withdrawal except as part of a
supervised rapid detoxification protocol.
A set of adverse effects resembling a vestigial withdrawal syndrome tends
to affect up to 10 percent of persons who take opioid receptor antagonists. Up
to 15 percent of persons taking naltrexone may experience abdominal pain,
cramps, nausea, and vomiting, which may be limited by transiently halving
the dosage or altering the time of administration. Adverse CNS effects of
naltrexone, experienced by up to 10 percent of persons, include headache,
low energy, insomnia, anxiety, and nervousness. Joint and muscle pains may
occur in up to 10 percent of persons taking naltrexone, as may rash.
Naltrexone may cause dosage-related hepatic toxicity at dosages well
above 50 mg a day; 20 percent of persons taking 300 mg a day of naltrexone




<<<PAGE 2181>>>

may experience serum aminotransferase concentrations 3 to 19 times the
upper limit of normal. The hepatocellular injury of naltrexone appears to be a
dose-related toxic effect rather than an idiosyncratic reaction. At the lowest
dosages of naltrexone required for significant opioid antagonism,
hepatocellular injury is not typically observed. However, naltrexone dosages
as low as 50 mg a day may be hepatotoxic in persons with underlying liver
disease, such as persons with cirrhosis of the liver caused by chronic alcohol
abuse. Serum aminotransferase concentrations should be monitored monthly
for the first 6 months of naltrexone therapy and after that based on clinical
suspicion. Hepatic enzyme concentrations usually return to normal after
discontinuation of naltrexone therapy.
If analgesia is required while a dose of an opioid receptor antagonist is
pharmacologically active, opioid agonists should be avoided in favor of
benzodiazepines or other nonopioid analgesics. Persons taking opioid
receptor antagonists should be instructed that low dosages of opioids will not
affect them. However, larger dosages could overcome the receptor blockade
and suddenly produce symptoms of profound opioid overdosage, with
sedation possibly progressing to coma or death. Use of opioid receptor
antagonists is contraindicated in persons who are taking opioid agonists,
small amounts of which may be present in over-the-counter antiemetic and
antitussive preparations; in persons with acute hepatitis or hepatic failure; and
in persons who are hypersensitive to the drugs.
Because naltrexone is transported across the placenta, opioid receptor
antagonists should only be taken by pregnant women if a compelling need
outweighs the potential risks to the fetus. It is not known whether opioid
receptor antagonists are distributed into breast milk.
Opioid receptor antagonists are relatively safe drugs, and the ingestion of
high doses of opioid receptor antagonists should be treated with supportive
measures combined with efforts to decrease GI absorption.
Because buprenorphine has a high affinity and slow displacement from the
opioid receptors, nalmefene may not wholly reverse buprenorphine-induced
respiratory depression.
Drug Interactions
Many drug interactions involving opioid receptor antagonists have been




<<<PAGE 2182>>>

discussed earlier, including those with opioid agonists associated with drug
abuse as well as those involving antiemetics and antitussives. Because of its
extensive hepatic metabolism, naltrexone may affect or be affected by other
drugs that influence hepatic enzyme levels. However, the clinical importance
of these potential interactions is not known.
One potentially hepatotoxic drug that has been used in some cases with
opioid receptor antagonists is disulfiram (Antabuse). Although no adverse
effects were observed, frequent laboratory monitoring is indicated when such
combination therapy is contemplated. Opioid receptor antagonists have been
reported to potentiate the sedation associated with the use of thioridazine
(Mellaril), an interaction that probably applies equally to all low-potency
DRAs.
Intravenous nalmefene has been administered after benzodiazepines,
inhalational anesthetics, muscle relaxants, and muscle relaxant antagonists
were administered in conjunction with general anesthetics without any
adverse reactions. Care should be taken when using flumazenil (Romazicon)
and nalmefene together because both of these agents have been shown to
induce seizures in preclinical studies.
Laboratory Interferences
The potential for false-positive urine for opiates using less specific urine
screens such as enzyme-multiplied immunoassay technique (EMIT) may
exist, given that naltrexone and nalmefene are derivatives of oxymorphone.
Naltrexone does not interefere with thin-layer, gas-liquid, and high-pressure
liquid chromatographic methods used for the detection of opiates in the urine.
Dosage and Clinical Guidelines
We should take several steps to ensure that the person is opioid-free. These
steps are meant to avoid the possibility of precipitating an acute opioid
withdrawal syndrome. Within a supervised detoxification setting, at least 5
days should elapse after the last dose of short-acting opioids, such as heroin,
hydromorphone (Dilaudid), meperidine (Demerol), or morphine, and at least
10 days should elapse after the last dose of longer-acting opioids, such as
methadone, before opioid antagonists are initiated. Some rapid detoxification
protocols use shorter abstinence periods, however these require special




<<<PAGE 2184>>>

Rapid Detoxification. Rapid detoxification has been standardized using
naltrexone, although nalmefene would be expected to be equally effective
with fewer adverse effects. In rapid detoxification protocols, the addicted
person stops opioid use abruptly and begins the first opioid-free day by
taking clonidine 0.2 mg orally every 2 hours for nine doses, to a maximum
dose of 1.8 mg, during which time the BP is monitored every 30 to 60
minutes for the first 8 hours. Naltrexone 12.5 mg is administered 1 to 3 hours
after the first dose of clonidine. To reduce muscle cramps and later insomnia,
a short-acting benzodiazepine, such as oxazepam 30 to 60 mg, is
administered simultaneously with the first dose of clonidine, and half of the
initial dose is readministered every 4 to 6 hours as needed. The maximum
daily dosage of oxazepam should not exceed 180 mg. The person undergoing
rapid detoxification should be accompanied home by a reliable escort. On the
second day, similar doses of clonidine and the benzodiazepine are
administered but with a single dose of naltrexone 25 mg taken in the
morning. Relatively asymptomatic persons may return home after 3 to 4
hours. Administration of the daily maintenance dose of 50 mg of naltrexone
is begun on the third day, and the dosages of clonidine and the
benzodiazepine are gradually tapered off over 5 to 10 days.

DISULFIRAM AND ACAMPROSATE
Disulfiram (Antabuse) and acamprosate (Campral) are drugs used to treat
alcohol use disorder. Disulfiram has suffered from a reputation as a
dangerous medication only suitable for highly motivated and strictly
supervised drinkers because of the severe physical reactions the drug causes
after drinking. Experience has shown, however, that at recommended doses,
it is an acceptable and safe medication for dependent drinkers seeking to
sustain abstinence. The properties that constitute disulfiram’s main
therapeutic effect (i.e., the ability to produce unpleasant symptoms after
alcohol intake, also known as disulfiram–alcohol reaction) have created that
perception of dangerousness.
In the most severe cases, when disulfiram is combined with alcohol, severe
clinical conditions can occur. These include respiratory depression,
cardiovascular collapse, acute heart failure, convulsions, loss of
consciousness, and death in rare cases. These potential complications, as well




<<<PAGE 2284>>>

Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:3004.
Hser YI, Hoffman V, Grella CE, Anglin MD. A 33-year follow-up of
narcotics addicts. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2001;58:503–508.
Ivanov I. Disulfiram and acamprosate. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P,
eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed.
Vol. 2. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:3099.
Johnson BA. Update on neuropharmacological treatments for alcoholism:
scientific basis and clinical findings. Biochem Pharmacol. 2008;75(1):34.
Johnson BA, Ait-Daoud N, Prihoda TJ. Combining ondansetron and
naltrexone effectively treats biologically predisposed alcoholics: from
hypotheses to preliminary clinical evidence. Alcoholism Clin Exp Res.
2000;24(5):737–742.
Karachalios GN, Charalabopoulos A, Papalimneou V, Kiortsis D, Dimicco P.
Withdrawal syndrome following cessation of antihypertensive drug
therapy. Int J Clin Pract. 2005;5:562.
King A, De Wit H, Riley RC, Cao D, Niaura R. Efficacy of naltrexone in
smoking cessation: a preliminary study and an examination of sex
differences. Nicotine Tobacco Res. 2006;8(5):671–682.
Kleber HD. Methadone maintenance 4 decades later: thousands of lives saved
but still controversial. JAMA. 2008;300:2303.
Kornfield R, Watson S, Higashi AS, Conti RM, Dusetzina SB, Garfield CF,
Dorsey ER, Huskamp HA, Alexander GC. Effects of FDA advisories on
the pharmacologic treatment of ADHD, 2004–2008. Psychiatr Serv.
2013;64(4):339–346.
Krishnan-Sarin S, Rounsaville BJ, O’Malley SS. Opioid receptor antagonists:
naltrexone and nalmefene. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan
& Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Vol. 2.
Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:3171.
Krystal JH, Cramer JA, Kroll WF, Kirk GF, Rosenheck RA. Naltrexone in
the treatment of alcohol dependence. N Engl J Med. 2001;345(24):1734.
Laaksonen E, Koski-Jännes A, Salaspuro M, Ahtínen H, Alho H. A
randomized, multicentre, open-label, comparative trial of disulfiram,
naltrexone and acamprosate in the treatment of alcohol dependence.
Alcohol. 2008;43(1):53–61.
Likar R, Kayser H, Sittl R. Long-term management of chronic pain with
transdermal buprenorphine: a multicenter, open-label, follow-up study in




<<<PAGE 2285>>>

patients from three short-term clinical trials. Clin Ther. 2006;28(6):943–
952.
Mann K, Kiefer F, Spanagel R, Littleton J. Acamprosate: recent findings and
future research directions. Alcohol Clin Exp Res. 2008;32(7):1105–1110.
Marsch LA, Bickel WK, Badger GJ, Stothart ME, Quesnel KJ. Comparison
on pharmacological treatments for opioid-dependent adolescents: a
randomized controlled trial. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2005;62:1157.
Mattick RP, Kimber J. Breen C, Davoli M. Buprenorphine maintenance
versus placebo or methadone maintenance for opioid dependence.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2008:CD002207.
Ming X, Gordon E, Kang N, Wagner GC. Use of clonidine in children with
autism spectrum disorders. Brain Dev. 2008;30(7):454–760.
Monterosso JR, Flannery BA, Pettinati HM, Oslin DW, Rukstalis M.
Predicting treatment response to naltrexone: the influence of craving and
family history. Am J Addict. 2001;10(3):258–268.
Myers SM. The status of pharmacotherapy for autism spectrum disorders.
Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2007;8(11):1579.
Neumann AM, Blondell RD, Jaanimagi U, Giambrone AK, Homish GG,
Lozano JR, Kowalik U, Azadfard M. A preliminary study comparing
methadone and buprenorphine in patients with chronic pain and coexistent
opioid addiction. J Addict Dis. 2013;32(1):68–78.
Niederhofer H, Staffen W. Naltrexone and disulfiram in patients with alcohol
dependence and comorbid psychiatric disorders. Biol Psychiatry.
2005;57(10):1128.
Oliva EM, Trafton JA, Harris AH, Gordon AJ. Trends in opioid agonist
therapy in the Veterans Health Administration: is supply keeping up with
demand? Am J Drug Alcohol Abuse. 2013;39(2):103–107.
O’Malley SS, Cooney JL, Krishnan-Sarin S, Dubin J, McKee SA. A
controlled trial of naltrexone augmentation of nicotine replacement for
smoking cessation. Arch Intern Med. 2006;166:667.
Raymond NC, Grant JE, Kim SW, Coleman E. Treatment of compulsive
sexual behavior with naltrexone and serotonin reuptake inhibitors: two
case studies. Int Clin Psychopharmacol. 2002;17(4):201.
Ritvo JI, Park C. The psychiatric management of patients with alcohol
dependence. Curr Treat Options Neurol. 2007;9(5):381.
Sallee F, Connor DF, Newcorn JH. A review of the rationale and clinical


