<<<PAGE 416>>>

receptor antagonist, has been investigated without much success, based on
the notion that blocking endogenous opioids would reduce autistic symptoms.
Tetrahydrobiopterin, a coenzyme that enhances the action of enzymes, was
studied. However, the results were not significant. Post hoc analysis of the
three core symptoms of autism—social interaction, communication, and
stereotyped behaviors—revealed a significant improvement in social
interaction score after 6 months of active treatment. There was a positive
correlation between social response and IQ. These results suggest that there is
a possible effect of tetrahydrobiopterin on the social functioning of children
with autism.
A case report suggested that low-dose venlafaxine was efficacious in three
adolescents and young adults with autistic disorder with self-injurious
behavior and hyperactivity. The dose of venlafaxine used was 18.75 mg/day,
and the efficacy continued over 6 months.
Complementary and Alternative Medicine (CAM) Approaches to
Autism Spectrum Disorder
Complementary and alternative medicine (CAM) is a group of nontraditional
treatments used in conjunction with conventional treatments. Safe
interventions that target both core and associated behavioral features of
autism spectrum disorder with unknown efficacy include the following:
music therapy, to promote communication and expression, and yoga, to
promote attention and decrease activity level. A biologically based practice
that appears to be safe and efficacious is melatonin, which reduces sleeponset latency in children. Other biologic practices that appear to be safe but
with unknown efficacy include vitamin C, multivitamins, essential fatty
acids, and the amino acids carnosine and carnitine. Secretin is ineffective in
RCTs in the treatment of autism spectrum disorder.

EPIDEMIOLOGY
Prevalence
The diagnostic rate for autism spectrum disorders has increased over the last
two decades, and currently 1 in 54 children is diagnosed with autism
spectrum disorder in the United States. Autistic disorder, based on DSM-IV-




<<<PAGE 747>>>

opioids for both their analgesic and sedative effects (Table 3-9). Melatonin is
occasionally used but with mixed support and low-quality studies.
Treatment in Special Populations
Parkinson Disease. In Parkinson disease, antiparkinsonian agents can
cause delirium. If coexistent dementia is present, delirium is twice as likely to
develop in patients with Parkinson disease with dementia receiving
antiparkinsonian agents than in those without dementia. Decreasing the
dosage of the antiparkinsonian agent has to be weighed against a worsening
of motor symptoms. If we cannot reduce the antiparkinsonian agents, or if the
delirium persists after we do, an antipsychotic may help. However, this risks
worsening the disorder. The FDA has approved pimavanserin for psychosis
in Parkinson’s. It appears to be an inverse agonist and antagonist activity of
serotonin 5-HT2A and possibly 5-HT2C, with no appreciable affinity for
dopamine. Clozapine may also help and has empirical support. Quetiapine
has not been as rigorously studied as clozapine and may have parkinsonian
side effects, but it is used in clinical practice to treat psychosis in Parkinson
disease.
Table 3-8
Frequency of Clinical Features of Delirium Contrasted with
Dementia
Symptom

Delirium

Dementia

Mental Status Examination
Memory

Impaired, more Impaired, more long-term than
short-term
short-term
than longterm

Attention

Poor

Orientation

Grossly
Varies
disorganized

Impaired although usually to a
lesser degree




<<<PAGE 1529>>>

factors for bulimia nervosa, as well.
Just as the starvation state works to maintain anorexia nervosa, the cycle of
binge eating and purging often becomes self-sustaining in bulimia nervosa.
Individuals with bulimia nervosa tend to restrict their food intake outside of
binge episodes, which puts them at increased risk for episodes of overeating.
In turn, after experiencing a binge episode and the resulting compensatory
behaviors, individuals often renew their commitment to restrictive eating in
an attempt to avoid future overeating episodes. Thus, this cycle tends to
become self-perpetuating and works to maintain the disorder.
Environmental and Social Factors. Individuals with bulimia nervosa
are likely affected by similar environmental and social stressors as those with
anorexia nervosa.
Binge-Eating Disorder
We know even less about the etiology of binge-eating disorder than of
anorexia or bulimia nervosa. Research thus far has suggested that a history of
childhood obesity, mood disorder, and negative family dynamics may put
individuals at higher risk for developing the illness. In some individuals,
dietary restriction appears to play a role in precipitating episodes of binge
eating, as in bulimia nervosa. Many individuals with binge-eating disorder,
however, seem to experience binge eating outside of the context of dietary
restriction. For these individuals, intense emotions may provoke binge
episodes.
Other Specified Feeding and Eating Disorder
Night-Eating Syndrome. We also know little about the cause of nighteating disorder. However, researchers have studied the hormones melatonin,
leptin, ghrelin, and cortisol as they relate to this disorder. Night-eating
syndrome also appears to run in families.

References
Allison KC, Lundgren JD, O’Reardon JP, Geliebter A, Gluck ME, Vinai P,
Mitchell JE, Schenck CH, Howell MJ, Crow SJ, Engel S, Latzer Y,




<<<PAGE 1622>>>

TREATMENT APPROACH
Insomnia
Pharmacologic Treatment. For many years, benzodiazepines were the
most commonly prescribed sedative–hypnotic medications for treating
insomnia. Other benzodiazepine-receptor agonists (e.g., zolpidem and similar
drugs) then emerged as an option to treat insomnia. The subsequent
development of a low-dose antihistamine (doxepin), a melatonin receptor
agonist (ramelteon), and an orexin antagonist (suvorexant) have more
recently augmented the armamentarium of medications approved for treating
insomnia. However, unapproved off-label (and not recommended) use of
sedating antidepressants is commonplace. Additionally, a variety of over-thecounter (OTC) sleep aids is available. Nonprescription formulas include
sedating antihistamines, protein precursors, and other substances. Ltryptophan was trendy and readily available at health food stores until an
outbreak of eosinophilia led to pulling it off the shelves. However, the cause
was a single manufacturer, and L-tryptophan subsequently became available
OTC again. Melatonin is the leader among self-administered food additives
believed by some to alleviate sleeplessness. Low-dose melatonin can improve
sleep when used to align or reentrain the circadian rhythm with the desired
sleep–wake schedule.
Table 15-23
Disorders That Are Commonly Comorbid with Various
Sleep Disorders
Insomnia Disorder
Bipolar disorder
Generalized anxiety disorder
Major depressive disorder
Posttraumatic stress disorder
Schizophrenia
Hypersomnolence Disorder
Bipolar disorder




<<<PAGE 1625>>>

Insomnia, however, usually returns upon discontinuation of dosing.
The clinical practice guideline from the American Academy of Sleep
Medicine recommends the use of suvorexant, eszopiclone, zaleplon,
zolpidem, triazolam, temazepam, ramelteon, and doxepin for the treatment of
insomnia (with specific agents having different indications for sleep-onset or
sleep-maintenance insomnia). They recommend against the use of trazodone,
tiagabine, diphenhydramine, melatonin, tryptophan, and valerian for
insomnia treatment.
Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy for Insomnia. Cognitive-behavioral
therapy for insomnia (CBTi), as a treatment modality, uses a combination of
behavioral and cognitive techniques to overcome dysfunctional sleep
behaviors, misperceptions, and distorted, disruptive thoughts about sleep.
Behavioral techniques include universal sleep hygiene, stimulus control
therapy, sleep restriction therapy, relaxation therapies, and biofeedback.
Studies repeatedly show significant, sustained improvement in sleep
symptoms, including number and duration of awakenings and sleep latency,
from CBTi. Short-term benefits are similar to that of medication, but CBTi
tends to have lasting benefits, even 36 months after treatment. With the
cessation of the medication, insomnia frequently returns and is sometimes
accompanied by rebound insomnia. CBTi has no apparent adverse effects.
There are no established “best practice” guidelines for length or quantity of
sessions. CBTi, however, is not without limitations. Most data do not
compare the efficacy of the individual components of CBTi. However, sleep
hygiene education alone produces an insignificant effect on sleep. Intuitively,
the multicomponent approach addresses many of the variables contributing to
insomnia. Other limitations of CBTi include lack of or unavailability of
trained specialists, cost of sessions, and noncoverage by insurance carriers.
The effects of CBTi take longer to emerge than the effects of medications.
Usually, when patients finally come for treatment of their insomnia, they are
desperate. It is challenging to convince them to try a therapy that may take
several weeks before it will provide relief. Furthermore, patients do not
assume a passive role in this type of therapy; they must be active participants.
Many individuals not only want a “quick fix,” but they also want to undergo
a procedure or have something administered rather than be involved in the
therapeutic process. For optimal CBTi, patients must commit to come to




<<<PAGE 1636>>>

WEIGHT LOSS. Weight loss is known to help many patients. However, because

losing weight and keeping it off is difficult and unreliably achieved, the
prudent clinician should recommend weight loss but also rely on other
therapies.
CSA due to High-Altitude Periodic Breathing. We can treat CSA due
to high-altitude periodic breathing with acetazolamide, which lowers serum
pH and increases the respiratory drive. Acetazolamide side effects include
metabolic acidosis, electrolyte imbalance, anaphylaxis, Stevens–Johnson
syndrome, toxic epidermal necrolysis, and agranulocytosis. Common
reactions include but are not limited to fatigue, anorexia, taste changes,
polyuria, diarrhea, melena, tinnitus, and photosensitivity.
Circadian Rhythm Sleep–Wake Disorders
Light Therapy. Research indicates that exposing an individual to bright
lights can reset the circadian pacemaker. This seems especially the case when
the light is bright (higher than 10,000 lux) or in the blue spectrum. With the
precise timing of bright light exposure, we can reset the biologic clock.
Exposure to light modifies the set-point of the biologic clock. Using core
body temperature as a physiologic marker, one can use bright lights to
produce a phase delay when presented before the temperature nadir. By
contrast, light exposure after the temperature nadir evokes phase advance.
The closer one presents light to the point of inflection (temperature nadir), the
more robust is the response in altering the cycle. Thus, we can use earlymorning bright-light therapy to phase advance individuals with delayed sleep
phase syndrome.
Similarly, exposure to bright light in the evening can help patients with
advanced sleep phase syndrome. The blue part of the light spectrum is the
crucial ingredient in phase setting and shifting. Therefore, blue light exposure
(or limitation with blue-blocking eyewear) at specific times can provide
therapeutic benefit. Clinicians are using light therapy to reset the circadian
rhythm of shift workers, astronauts, and individuals experiencing jet lag.
Medication. Researchers posit that melatonin secretion acts as the biologic
substrate for the internal circadian oscillator. Under normal circumstances,




<<<PAGE 1637>>>

melatonin levels begin to rise at dusk and remain elevated until dawn. Bright
light suppresses the release of melatonin. Melatonin, in a sense, is the signal
of darkness in the brain. As such, we can use it clinically to manage sighted
patients with disturbed sleep–wake cycles. Melatonin is available over the
counter in the United States. A prescription synthetic melatonin agonist
(ramelteon) is also available. Ramelteon is FDA approved for treating
patients with sleep-onset insomnia but is used off label for the entire
spectrum of circadian rhythm sleep disorders. Outside the United States, a
sustained-release prescription form of melatonin is available. Of interest, the
only medication approved for shift work sleep disorder is the wakepromoting compound modafinil. Modafinil treats sleepiness occurring during
night shift work.
Chronotherapy. Chronotherapy is one technique used to reset the biologic
clock. It involves progressively phase delaying a person until synchronizing
the circadian oscillator with the desired sleep–wake schedule. Most young
and middle-aged adults have a propensity to phase delay the circadian sleep–
wake rhythm progressively anyhow. Thus, phase delaying each night by 2 to
3 hours is simpler than phase advancing because it capitalizes on a natural
tendency. Halting the phase delay at the appropriate moment and maintaining
the desired synchrony can be a challenge. The patient also has to cope with
an odd sleep–wake schedule for the better part of a week during therapy
(which can interfere with school or work). For these reasons, the
development of light therapy and pharmacologic interventions has
overshadowed chronotherapy.
Parasomnias and Sleep-Related Movement Disorders
Nightmare Disorder. Treatment using behavioral techniques can be
helpful. Desensitization and exposure therapy, image rehearsal therapy, lucid
dream therapy, and cognitive therapy can help address nightmare disorder.
Additionally, evidence for the use of prazosin, a CNS α-1 receptor antagonist,
in the treatment of PTSD-related nightmares is growing. Nitrazepam and
triazolam may also be helpful.
Recurrent Isolated Sleep Paralysis. Improved sleep hygiene and




<<<PAGE 2146>>>

MELATONIN AGONISTS: RAMELTEON AND MELATONIN
There are two melatonin receptor agonists commercially available in the
United States: (1) melatonin, a dietary supplement available in various
preparations in health food stores, and not under FDA regulations; (2) and
ramelteon (Rozerem), an FDA-approved drug for the treatment of insomnia
characterized by difficulties with sleep onset. Both exogenous melatonin and
ramelteon are thought to exert their effects by interaction with central
melatonin receptors.
Ramelteon
Ramelteon (Rozerem) is a melatonin receptor agonist used to treat sleeponset insomnia. Unlike the benzodiazepines, ramelteon has no appreciable
affinity for the GABA receptor complex.
Pharmacologic Actions. Ramelteon essentially mimics melatonin’s
sleep-promoting properties and has a high affinity for melatonin MT1 and
MT2 receptors in the brain. These receptors are thought to be critical in the
regulation of the body’s sleep–wake cycle.
Ramelteon is rapidly absorbed and eliminated over a dose range of 4 to 64
mg. Maximum plasma concentration (Cmax) is reached approximately 45
minutes after administration, and the elimination half-life is 1 to 2.6 hours.
The total absorption of ramelteon is at least 84 percent, but extensive firstpass metabolism results in a bioavailability of approximately 2 percent.
Ramelteon is metabolized primarily through the CYP1A2 pathway and
eliminated principally in urine. Repeated once-daily dosing does not appear
to result in accumulation, likely because of the compound’s short half-life.
Therapeutic Indications. The FDA-approved ramelteon for the treatment
of insomnia characterized by difficulty with sleep onset. Potential off-label
use is centered on the application in circadian rhythm disorders,
predominantly jet lag, delayed sleep phase syndrome, and shift work sleep
disorder.
Clinical trials and animal studies have failed to demonstrate evidence of
rebound insomnia or withdrawal effects.




<<<PAGE 2147>>>

Precautions and Adverse Events. Headache is the most common side
effect of ramelteon. Other adverse effects may include somnolence, fatigue,
dizziness, worsening insomnia, depression, nausea, and diarrhea. We should
not use the drug in patients with severe hepatic impairment. It is also not
recommended in patients with severe sleep apnea or severe chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. Prolactin levels may be increased in women.
The drug should be used with caution, if at all, in nursing mothers and
pregnant women.
Ramelteon has been found sometimes to decrease blood cortisol and
testosterone and to increase prolactin. Female patients should be monitored
for the cessation of menses and galactorrhea, decreased libido, and fertility
problems. The safety and effectiveness of ramelteon in children has not been
established.
Drug Interactions. CYP1A2 is the major isozyme involved in the hepatic
metabolism of ramelteon. Accordingly, fluvoxamine (Luvox) and other
CYP1A2 inhibitors may increase the side effects of ramelteon.
Ramelteon should be administered with caution in patients taking CYP1A2
inhibitors, potent CYP3A4 inhibitors such as ketoconazole, and strong
CYP2C inhibitors such as fluconazole (Diflucan). No clinically meaningful
interactions were found when ramelteon was coadministered with
omeprazole, theophylline, dextromethorphan, midazolam, digoxin, and
warfarin.
Dosing and Clinical Guidelines. The usual dose of ramelteon is 8 mg
within 30 minutes of going to bed. It should not be taken with or immediately
after high-fat meals.
Melatonin
Melatonin (N-acetyl-5-methoxytryptamine) is a hormone produced mainly at
night in the pineal gland. Ingested melatonin can reach and bind to
melatonin-binding sites in the brains of mammals and produce somnolence
when used at high doses. Melatonin is available as a dietary supplement and
is not a medication. Few well-controlled clinical trials have been conducted
to determine its effectiveness in treating such conditions as insomnia, jet lag,
and sleep disturbances related to shift work.




<<<PAGE 2148>>>

Pharmacologic Actions. Melatonin’s secretion is stimulated by the dark
and inhibited by the light. It is naturally synthesized from the amino acid
tryptophan, which is converted to serotonin and finally converted to
melatonin. The suprachiasmatic nuclei (SCN) of the hypothalamus have
melatonin receptors, and melatonin may have a direct action on SCN to
influence circadian rhythms, which are relevant for jet lag and sleep
disturbances. In addition to the pineal gland, melatonin is also produced in
the retina and GI tract.
Melatonin has a very short half-life of 0.5 to 6 minutes. Plasma
concentrations are a function of the dose administered and the endogenous
rhythm. Approximately 90 percent of melatonin is cleared through the firstpass metabolism by way of the CYP1A1 and CYP1A2 pathways. Elimination
occurs principally in urine.
Exogenous melatonin interacts with the melatonin receptors that suppress
neuronal firing and promote sleep. There does not appear to be a dose–
response relationship between exogenous melatonin administrations and
sleep effects.
Therapeutic Indications. Melatonin is approved for insomnia in the
European Union and several other countries, however, it is not approved by
the FDA for any medical use. It is sold over the counter in the United States
and Canada but requires a prescription in some other countries such as the
United Kingdom. Individuals have used exogenous melatonin to address
sleep difficulties (insomnia, circadian rhythm disorders), cancer (breast,
prostate, colorectal), seizures, depression, anxiety, and seasonal affective
disorder. Some studies suggest that exogenous melatonin may have some
antioxidant effects and antiaging properties.
Precautions and Adverse Reactions. Adverse events associated with
melatonin include fatigue, dizziness, headache, irritability, and somnolence.
Disorientation, confusion, sleepwalking, vivid dreams, and nightmares have
also been observed, often with effects resolving after melatonin
administration was suspended.
Melatonin may reduce fertility in both men and women. In men,
exogenous melatonin reduces sperm motility, and long-term administration
has been shown to inhibit testicular aromatase levels. In women, exogenous




<<<PAGE 2149>>>

melatonin may inhibit ovarian function, and for that reason, it has been
evaluated as a contraceptive, but with inconclusive results.
Drug Interactions. As a dietary supplement preparation, exogenous
melatonin is not regulated by the FDA and has not been subjected to the same
type of drug interaction studies that were performed for ramelteon. Caution is
suggested in coadministering melatonin with blood thinners (e.g., warfarin
[Coumadin], aspirin, and heparin), antiseizure medications, and medications
that lower BP.
Laboratory Interference. Melatonin is not known to interfere with any
commonly used clinical laboratory tests.
Dosage and Administration. Over-the-counter melatonin is available in
the following formulations: 1-, 2.5-, 3-, and 5-mg capsules; 1-mg/4-mL
liquid; 0.5- and 3-mg lozenges; 2.5-mg sublingual tablets; and 1-, 2-, and 3mg timed-release tablets.
Standard recommendations are to take the desired melatonin dose at
bedtime, but some evidence from clinical trials suggests that dosing up to 2
hours before habitual bedtime may produce a more significant improvement
in sleep onset.
Agomelatine (Valdoxan). Agomelatine is structurally related to melatonin
and is used in Europe as a treatment for MDD. It acts as an agonist at
melatonin (MT1 and MT2) receptors. It also acts as a serotonin antagonist.
Analysis of agomelatine clinical trial data raised serious questions about the
efficacy and safety of the drug. The drug is not being marketed in the United
States.

PRAZOSIN
Prazosin (Minipress) is a quinazoline derivative and one of a new chemical
class of antihypertensives. It is an α1-adrenergic receptor antagonist as
opposed to the drugs mentioned above, which are α2-blockers.
Pharmacologic Actions




<<<PAGE 2278>>>

a major active metabolite of buspirone: assessment of pharmacokinetics
and 5-hydroxytryptamine 1A receptor occupancy in rats. Drug Metab
Dispos. 2007;35(8):1387–1392.
Drugs Used to Treat Sleep Disorders
Bannan N, Rooney S, O’Connor J. Zopiclone misuse: an update from Dublin.
Drug Alcohol Rev. 2007;26:83–85.
Boehlein JK, Kinzie JD. Pharmacologic reduction of CNS noradrenergic
activity in PTSD: the case for clonidine and prazosin. J Psychiatr Pract.
2007;13:72–78.
Calvo JR, Gonzalez-Yanes C, Maldonado M. The role of melatonin in the
cells of the innate immunity: a review. J Pineal Res. 2013;55(2):103–120.
DeMicco M, Wang-Weigand S, Zhang J. Long-term therapeutic effects of
ramelteon treatment in adults with chronic insomnia: a 1-year study. Sleep.
2006;
29(Suppl):A234.
Doghramji K. Melatonin and its receptors: a new class of sleep-promoting
agents. J Clin Sleep Med. 2007;3(5 Suppl):S17.
Erman M, Seiden D, Zammit G, Sainati S, Zhang J. An efficacy, safety, and
dose-response study of ramelteon in patients with chronic primary
insomnia. Sleep Med. 2006;7(1):17–24.
Johnson MW, Suess PE, Griffiths RR. Ramelteon: a novel hypnotic lacking
abuse liability and sedative adverse effects. Arch Gen Psychiatry.
2006;63(10):
1149–1157.
Karim A, Bradford D, Siebert F, Zhao Z. Pharmacokinetic effect of multiple
oral doses of donepezil on ramelteon, and vice versa, in healthy adults.
Sleep. 2007;
30(Suppl):A244.
Kato K, Hirai K, Nishiyama K, Uchikawa O, Fukatsu K. Neurochemical
properties of ramelteon (TAK-375), a selective MT1/MT2 receptor agonist.
Neuropharmacology. 2005;48(2):301–310.
Lemmer B. The sleep–wake cycle and sleeping pills. Physiol Behav.
2009;90:285.
Lieberman JA. Update on the safety considerations in the management of
insomnia with hypnotics: incorporating modified-release formulations into




<<<PAGE 2279>>>

primary care. Prim Care Companion J Clin Psychiatry. 2007;9(1):25–31.
Mahajan B, Kaushal S, Chopra SC. Ramelteon: a new melatonin receptor
agonist. J Anaesth Clin Pharmacol. 2008;24(4):463.
Mundey K, Benloucif S, Harsanyi K, Dubocovich ML, Zee PC. Phasedependent treatment of delayed sleep phase syndrome with melatonin.
Sleep. 2005;28(10):
1271–1278.
Najib J. Eszopiclone, a nonbenzodiazepine sedative-hypnotic agent for the
treatment of transient and chronic insomnia. Clin Ther. 2006;28:490–516.
Natural Standard Research Collaboration. Melatonin. Medline Plus—Herbs
and
Supplements.
2007.
Available
at
http://www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/druginfo/natural/patientmelatonin.html.
Norris ER, Karen B, Correll JR, Zemanek KJ, Lerman J, Primelo RA,
Kaufmann MW. A double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled trial of
adjunctive ramelteon for the treatment of insomnia and mood stability in
patients with euthymic bipolar disorder. J Affect Disord.2013;144(1–
2):141–147.
Roth T, Seiden D, Sainati S, Wang-Weigand S, Zhang J. Effects of ramelteon
on patient-reported sleep latency in older adults with chronic insomnia.
Sleep Med. 2006;7(4):312–318.
Roth T, Stubbs C, Walsh JK. Ramelteon (TAK-375), a selective MT1/MT2receptor agonist, reduces latency to persistent sleep in a model of transient
insomnia related to a novel sleep environment. Sleep. 2005;28(3):303–307.
Scharf MB, Lankford A. Melatonin receptor agonists: ramelteon and
melatonin. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s
Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Vol. 2. Philadelphia, PA:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:3145.
Srinivasan V, Ohta Y, Espino J, Pariente JA, Rodriguez AB, Mohamed M,
Zakaria R. Metabolic syndrome, its pathophysiology and the role of
melatonin. Recent Pat Endocr Metab Immune Drug Discov. 2013;7(1):11–
25.
Turek FW, Gillette MU. Melatonin, sleep, and circadian rhythms: rationale
for development of specific melatonin agonists. Sleep Med. 2004;5(6):523.
Zammit G, Erman M, Wang-Weigand S, Sainati S, Zhang J. Evaluation of




<<<PAGE 2540>>>

trouble falling asleep. When prescribing sedative-hypnotic drugs for older
persons, clinicians must monitor the patients for unwanted cognitive,
behavioral, and psychomotor effects, including memory impairment
(anterograde amnesia), residual sedation, rebound insomnia, daytime
withdrawal, and unsteady gait.
Changes in sleep structure among persons over 65 years of age involve
both REM sleep and nonrapid eye movement (NREM) sleep. The REM
changes include the redistribution of REM sleep throughout the night, more
REM episodes, shorter REM episodes, and less total REM sleep. The NREM
changes include the decreased amplitude of delta waves, a lower percentage
of stages 3 and 4 sleep, and a higher percentage of stages 1 and 2 sleep. Also,
older persons experience increased awakening after sleep onset.
Altered timing and consolidation of the sleep account for much of the
deterioration in the quality of sleep. This is due, in part, to decreasing
melatonin and alternated responses to the adenosine system with age. With
advanced age, persons have a lower amplitude of circadian rhythms, a 12hour sleep-propensity rhythm, and shorter circadian cycles.

SUICIDE RISK
Elderly persons have a higher risk of suicide than any other population. The
suicide rate for white men over the age of 65 is five times higher than that of
the general population. One-third of elderly persons report loneliness as the
principal reason for considering suicide. Approximately 10 percent of elderly
individuals with suicidal ideation report financial problems, poor medical
health, or depression as reasons for suicidal thoughts. Suicide victims differ
demographically from individuals who attempt suicide. About 60 percent of
those who commit suicide are men; 75 percent of those who attempt suicide
are women. Suicide victims, as a rule, use guns or hang themselves, whereas
70 percent of suicide attempters take a drug overdose, and 20 percent cut or
slash themselves. Psychological autopsy studies suggest that most elderly
persons who commit suicide have had a psychiatric disorder, most commonly
depression. Psychiatric disorders of suicide victims, however, often do not
receive medical or psychiatric attention. More elderly suicide victims are
widowed, and fewer are single, separated, or divorced than is true of younger
adults. Violent methods of suicide are more common in the elderly, and




<<<PAGE 3088>>>

Patients with hyperprolactinemia often complain of depression, decreased
libido, stress intolerance, anxiety, and increased irritability. These behavioral
symptoms usually resolve in parallel with decrements in serum prolactin
when surgical or pharmacologic treatments are used. In psychotic patients,
prolactin concentrations and prolactin-related sexual disturbances have been
positively correlated with the severity of tardive dyskinesia. Prolactin levels
are also positively correlated with adverse symptoms in schizophrenia.
Melatonin
Melatonin, a pineal hormone, is derived from the serotonin molecule and it
controls photoperiodically mediated endocrine events (particularly those of
the hypothalamic–pituitary–gonadal axis). It also modulates immune
function, mood, and reproductive performance and is a potent antioxidant and
free-radical scavenger. Melatonin has a depressive effect on CNS excitability,
is an analgesic, and has seizure-inhibiting effects in animal studies.
Melatonin can be a useful therapeutic agent in the treatment of circadian
phase disorders such as jet lag. Intake of melatonin increases the speed of
falling asleep, as well as its duration and quality.
Oxytocin
Oxytocin, also a posterior pituitary hormone, is involved in osmoregulation,
the milk ejection reflex, food intake, and female maternal and sexual
behaviors. Oxytocin may be released during orgasm, more so in women than
in men, and promote bonding between the sexes. It has been used in autistic
children experimentally in an attempt to increase socialization.
Insulin
Increasing evidence indicates that insulin may be integrally involved in
learning and memory. Insulin receptors occur in high density in the
hippocampus and are thought to help neurons metabolize glucose. Patients
with Alzheimer disease have lower insulin concentrations in the CSF than
controls, and both insulin and glucose dramatically improve verbal memory.
Depression is frequent in patients with diabetes, as are indexes of impaired
hormonal response to stress. It is not known whether these findings represent
the direct effects of the disease or are secondary, nonspecific effects. Some




<<<PAGE 3142>>>

associated with the day–night cycle. Organisms have evolved to use this daily
change in light levels as a time cue or zeitgeber (German: zeit, time; geber,
giver) to reset the endogenous circadian clock. Regulation of the circadian
pacemaker through the detection of changes in illuminance requires a
photoreceptive apparatus that communicates with the central oscillator. This
apparatus is known to reside in the eyes because surgical removal of the eyes
renders an animal incapable of resetting its clock in response to light.
The circadian clock drives many rhythms. These include rhythms in
behavior, core body temperature, sleep, feeding, drinking, and hormonal
levels. One such circadian-regulated hormone is the indoleamine, melatonin.
Melatonin synthesis is controlled through a multisynaptic pathway from the
SCN to the pineal gland. Serum levels of melatonin become elevated at night
and return to baseline during the day. The nocturnal rise in melatonin is a
convenient marker of circadian phase. Exposure to light elicits two distinct
effects on the daily melatonin profile. First, light acutely suppresses elevated
melatonin levels, immediately decreasing them to baseline levels. Second,
light shifts the phase of the circadian rhythm of melatonin synthesis. Because
melatonin can be assayed easily, it provides a convenient window into the
state of the circadian pacemaker. Any perturbation of the clock is reflected in
the melatonin profile; thus, melatonin offers an output that can be used to
study the regulation of the central circadian pacemaker.
Sleep and Circadian Rhythms
Sleep Regulation. Restful consolidated sleep is most appreciated when
sleep disturbances are experienced. Sleep is the integrated product of two
oscillatory processes. The first process frequently referred to as the sleep
homeostat, is an oscillation that stems from the accumulation and dissipation
of sleep debt. The biologic substrates encoding sleep debt are not known,
although adenosine is emerging as a primary candidate neuromodulator of the
sleep homeostat. The second oscillatory process is governed by the circadian
clock and controls a daily rhythm in sleep propensity or, conversely, arousal.
These interacting oscillations can be dissociated by housing subjects in a
timeless environment for several weeks.
The circadian cycle in arousal (wakefulness) steadily increases throughout
the day, reaching a maximum immediately before the circadian increase in




<<<PAGE 3147>>>

into nighttime through artificial lighting. (From Wehr TA, Moul DE, Barbato G,
Giesen HA, Seidel JA, Barker C, Bender C. Conservation of photoperiodresponsive mechanisms in humans. Am J Physiol. 1993;265:R846, with
permission.)

Seasonality
The 24-hour period of the Earth’s rotation around its axis is unchanging.
However, the Earth’s axis is tilted 23.45 degrees from the plane of its orbit
around the sun (the ecliptic). The relative day to night proportion within day
varies as the Earth proceeds through its orbit of the sun. Many organisms are
capable of synchronizing physiology to the seasonal cycle to maximize
survival. For example, precise seasonal cycles in reproduction are seen
throughout the plant and animal kingdoms. Large mammals that typically
have long gestation periods, such as sheep, conceive in the fall when the
nights are long and the days are short, so birth occurs during the relatively
mild season of spring. These animals are referred to as short-day breeders.
Conversely, mammals with gestation periods of only a few weeks, such as
hamsters, conceive and give birth during spring and summer, when the days
are long and the nights are short. Hence, these animals are referred to as longday breeders. Like circadian rhythms, many of these yearly (circannual)
rhythms tend to persist in the absence of seasonal cues with endogenous
periods of approximately 1 year.
Melatonin and Seasonality. The most reliable environmental parameter
providing a faithful representation of the solar day is the day–night cycle.
Similarly, the most reliable environmental parameter reflecting the
progression through the seasons is the change in day length, the fraction of
the 24-hour day between sunrise and sunset. In seasonally breeding animals,
day length is physiologically encoded through the melatonin profile. As
described previously, melatonin levels are elevated during the night. A long
night, such as that experienced during the short day lengths of winter, results
in an elevated melatonin profile of a relatively long duration. A short summer
night, by contrast, results in a short duration of elevated melatonin. This
seasonal signal is interpreted by the reproductive axis, resulting in an
appropriate reproductive response. Melatonin’s role in transducing day length
was elucidated by pinealectomizing seasonally breeding animals, thereby




<<<PAGE 3148>>>

removing the primary endogenous source of melatonin. Melatonin was then
infused in profiles mimicking long days or short days. The duration of
elevated melatonin was the primary determinant of seasonal reproductive
status, even when the infused profile was administered under a conflicting
day length. Variations in other parameters, such as the amplitude of the
melatonin profile, the amount of total melatonin synthesized, or the phase
relationship of the profile to the light-dark cycle, are of limited importance in
producing a humoral signal that transduces day length.
Reproductive responses to changing day length can be dramatic. A male
Siberian hamster (Phodopus sungorus) maintained in long days is
reproductively competent and typically has a testicular weight of
approximately 250 mg per testis. Under short days, however, the testes
regress to approximately 15 mg per testis, representing a 94 percent decrease
in testicular mass. The same degree of regression is observed in response to
melatonin infusions that mimic short days. Communication of the hormonally
transduced day length to the reproductive axis is likely to be mediated, at
least partially, through melatonin receptors in the pars tuberalis of the
pituitary gland. The exact mechanism remains unknown, but activation of
these receptors is hypothesized to regulate an unidentified factor putatively
named tuberalin indirectly. Tuberalin, in turn, controls gene expression and
prolactin release from lactotrophs in the adenohypophysis of the pituitary.
Seasonality in Humans. Whether humans are truly seasonal is still a point
of considerable debate. Several lines of evidence exist that suggest the
presence of a residual tendency toward seasonality. A peak in the rate of
suicide occurs in the summer; this peak is cross-cultural. Birth rates also tend
to show a seasonal variation; a small but distinguishable peak in the rate of
births occurs in spring and summer. This pattern, however, is itself variable
and is heavily influenced by unknown cultural and geographic factors. Of
interest, the amplitude of the spring–summer birth rate peak has diminished
as societies have become industrialized.
The decompressed bimodal structure of human sleep during long nights
indicates that the length of natural sleep is related to the length of the night.
Potentially, a two-oscillator system could function to maintain proper sleep
patterns during changing photoperiods. Such a proposed system would
consist of an evening oscillator that tracks the transition from day to night




<<<PAGE 3149>>>

(dusk) and a morning oscillator that tracks the transition from night to day
(dawn). The relative phase differences between these oscillators may encode
the changing day lengths associated with the passing of the seasons. Biologic
evidence for a two-oscillator system exists in rodents and humans.
The melatonin profile of many vertebrates, including some humans, is
bimodal, with evening and morning peaks. In rodents, metabolic and
electrophysiologic studies of the SCN typically have been done in brain slices
cut in the coronal plane. Results of electrophysiologic studies conducted in
brain slices cut in the horizontal plane have provided new insights. The action
potential frequency in SCN neurons from horizontally cut preparations is
bimodal, with peaks in the early and late subjective day. Furthermore, the
interpeak interval varies as a function of the photoperiod in which the animal
was housed. These studies lend credence to long-standing suspicions that the
SCN of seasonally breeding mammals and, perhaps, nonseasonal mammals
harbor a morning and evening oscillator that interact to convey day-length
information.
Effect of Aging. In general, as humans age, the circadian period shortens,
the circadian phase advances resulting in earlier waking times and bedtimes,
the amplitudes of most circadian rhythms decrease, and dramatic phase shifts
such as those caused by jet-lag are less tolerated. Again, a mouse model has
provided an interesting insight into the interaction of the aging process and
the circadian clock. The effect of chronic jet-lag on aged mice has dramatic
consequences on mortality. About half of aged mice forced to phase advance
6 hours once per week survive this treatment compared with an 83 percent
survival rate in unshifted age-matched mice. Aged mice subjected to weekly
6-hour phase delays show an intermediate survival of 68 percent. These
profound effects of phase-shifting are not observed in younger mice. The
pathogenesis of chronic jet-lag remains to be determined. Of interest, these
mice did not have an increased rate of tumorigenesis. It is likely that in
humans, as in mice, the internal desynchrony of oscillators that result from a
rotating light schedule may have dire consequences that may be exacerbated
by aging.
Circadian Rhythms and Pharmacotherapy




<<<PAGE 3686>>>

Megacolon, 483
Megaloblastic madness, 262
Melancholia, 380
Melatonin, 514, 1003
circadian rhythms and, 1004
for insomnia, 509–510
function of, 1004
human, 1004
rhythms, 1002
seasonality and, 1003
Melatonin (N-acetyl-5-methoxytryptamine), 681
Melatonin receptor agonists, 680–681
Mellaril. See Thioridazine
Memantine
for dementia, 239
dosage and clinical guidelines, 699
drug interactions, 699
pharmacologic actions, 698–699
precautions and adverse reactions, 699
therapeutic indications, 699
Memory
anatomy of, 932–934
assessment of, 54
in MSE, 10, 11t, 13t
cortical organization of memory, 1023–1024
frontal contributions to memory, 1028
functions, assessment of, 1030–1032, 1031f
long-term, 49
older adults, 89
memory systems, 1028
new learning capacity, 1032
priming, 1027–1028
psychogenic amnesia, 1032–1033
remote memory, 1032
retrograde amnesia, 1026–1027
self-reports, 1032
short-term, 49




<<<PAGE 3710>>>

treatment, 515
Parasympathetic system, 930
Parataxic distortion, 1088
Parathormone, 65
Parathyroid disorders, 261
Paraventricular nucleus, 968
Parental fit, 893
Parental right doctrine, 912
Parent–Child Interaction Therapy (PCIT), 111
Parent–Child Interaction Therapy Emotion Development (PCIT-ED),
174, 178
Parent–child relational problem, 588–589
Parenting, 908
Parenting skills, 588
Parent Management Training (PMT), 192
Parents
authoritarian, 588
permissive, 588
Parietal lobe impairment, 933
Parkinson disease, 21
delirium in, 230
dementia of, 244
Parkinsonism, 594
Paroxetine, 604, 627, 631–632, 713
Paroxysmal myoclonic dystonia with vocalization, 158t
Pars tuberalis, melatonin receptors, 1003
Partial hospital treatment, 826–827
Partial seizures, 251
Participant modeling, 772–773
Partner relational problems, 589
Passive-aggressive personality, 567
Paternalism, 829
strong, 829
weak, 829
Pathologic caretaking, 167. See also Reactive attachment disorder
Patient
access to records, 28


