<<<PAGE 634>>>

benzodiazepine, may help to control anxiety symptoms in separation anxiety
disorder. Clonazepam has been studied in open trials and may be useful in
controlling symptoms of panic and other anxiety symptoms.
Although SSRIs and CBT alone and in combination have demonstrated
efficacy in the treatment of anxiety disorders in youth, approximately 20 to
35 percent of children and adolescents with anxiety disorders do not appear
to benefit. Several novel agents may be useful, some based on their effect on
the NMDA system. For example, D-cycloserine (DCS), currently FDA
approved in the treatment of pediatric tuberculosis, is a partial receptor
agonist of the NMDA system and is hypothesized to augment the benefits of
exposure treatment for phobias. Some evidence suggests that DCS may
increase the speed of exposure interventions; however, there is no proof of
long-term gains. Riluzole is an antiglutamatergic agent that decreases
glutamatergic transmission by inhibiting glutamate release and inactivation of
sodium channels in cortical neurons and blocking GABA reuptake. Due to its
antiglutamatergic effects, riluzole may provide augmentation in the treatment
of OCD and generalized anxiety disorder. Another agent, memantine, an
NMDA receptor antagonist with FDA approval in the treatment of
Alzheimer’s disease, has been hypothesized to decrease anxiety due to its
influence on the glutamatergic system. Published case reports have provided
mixed results.
Although most childhood anxiety disorders wax and wane over time,
school refusal associated with separation anxiety disorder is a psychiatric
emergency. A comprehensive treatment plan involves the child, the parents,
and the child’s peers and school. Family interventions are critical in the
management of separation anxiety disorder, especially in children who refuse
to attend school, so that firm encouragement of school attendance is
maintained while providing appropriate support. When a return to a full
school day is overwhelming, the treatment team and school should help
arrange a program so the child can progressively increase the time spent at
school. Graded contact with an object of anxiety is a form of behavior
modification useful for any type of separation anxiety. Some severe cases of
school refusal require hospitalization. Cognitive-behavioral modalities
include exposure to feared separations and cognitive strategies, such as
coping self-statements aimed at increasing a sense of autonomy and mastery.




<<<PAGE 819>>>

abnormalities in memory and speech, we should suspect a temporal lobe
tumor.
COGNITION. Impaired intellectual functioning often accompanies the presence

of a brain tumor, regardless of its type or location.
LANGUAGE SKILLS. Disorders of language function may be severe, mainly if

tumor growth is rapid. Defects of language function often obscure all other
mental symptoms.
Table 3-34
Commonly Used Anticonvulsant Drugs
Drug

Use

Carbamazepine Generalized tonic–clonic, partial

Maintenance
Dosage
(mg/day)
600–1,200

Clonazepam

Absence, atypical myoclonic

2–12

Ethosuximide

Absence

1,000–2,000

Gabapentin

Complex partial seizures
(augmentation)

900–3,600

Lamotrigine

Complex partial seizures,
generalized (augmentation)

300–500

Oxcarbazepine Partial

600–2,400

Phenobarbital

Generalized tonic–clonic

100–200

Phenytoin

Generalized tonic–clonic, partial,
status epilepticus

300–500

Primidone

Partial

750–1,000

Tiagabine

Generalized

32–56

Topiramate

Complex partial seizures
(augmentation)

200–400




<<<PAGE 963>>>

with the benzodiazepines. Table 4-24 lists the equivalent therapeutic doses of
benzodiazepines. Even when users take grossly excessive amounts (more
than 2 g) in suicide attempts, the symptoms include only drowsiness,
lethargy, ataxia, some confusion, and mild depression of the user’s vital
signs. The most lethal overdoses occur when the user takes a benzodiazepine
in combination with other sedatives, such as alcohol. In such cases, small
doses of benzodiazepines can cause death. The availability of flumazenil, a
specific benzodiazepine antagonist, has reduced the lethality of the
benzodiazepines. Flumazenil can be used in emergency departments to
reverse the effects of benzodiazepines.
Table 4-24
Approximate
Therapeutic
Benzodiazepines

Equivalent

Doses

Generic Name

Trade Name

Dose (mg)

Alprazolam

Xanax

1

Chlordiazepoxide

Librium

25

Clonazepam

Klonopin

0.5–1.0

Clorazepate

Tranxene

15

Diazepam

Valium

10

Estazolam

Prosom

1

Flurazepam

Dalmane

30

Lorazepam

Ativan

2

Oxazepam

Serax

30

Temazepam

Restoril

20

Triazolam

Halcion

0.25

Quazepam

Doral

15

Zolpidem

Ambien

10

of




<<<PAGE 970>>>

a. Hospitalize if there are medical or psychiatric indications, poor
social supports, or polysubstance dependence, or the patient is
unreliable.
b. Some clinicians recommend switching to longer-acting
benzodiazepine for withdrawal (e.g., diazepam, clonazepam);
others recommend stabilizing on the drug that patient was taking
or on phenobarbital.
c. After stabilization reduce dosage by 30% on the second or third
day and evaluate the response, keeping in mind that symptoms
that occur after decreases in benzodiazepines with short
elimination half-lives (e.g., lorazepam) appear sooner than with
those with longer elimination half-lives (e.g., diazepam).
d. Reduce dosage further by 10–25% every few days if tolerated.
e. Use adjunctive medications if necessary—carbamazepine, βadrenergic receptor antagonists, valproate, clonidine, and
sedative antidepressants have been used but their efficacy in
the treatment of the benzodiazepine abstinence syndrome has
not been established.
5. Detoxification from therapeutic dosages:
a. Initiate 10–25% dose reduction and evaluate response.
b. Dose, duration of therapy, and severity of anxiety influence the
rate of taper and need for adjunctive medications.
c. Most patients taking therapeutic doses have uncomplicated
discontinuation.
6. Psychological interventions may assist patients in detoxification
from benzodiazepines and in the long-term management of
anxiety.
Courtesy of Domenici A. Ciraulo, M.D., and Ofra Sarid-Segal, M.D.

Table 4-28
Pentobarbital
Withdrawal

Test

Dose

Procedure

Symptoms After Test Dose Estimated 24-Hr
of 200 mg Oral
Oral

for

Barbiturate

Estimated 24-Hr
Oral




<<<PAGE 1121>>>

clonazepam 0.5 mg every morning and at bedtime.
This patient presented with a single delusion regarding her neighbor
that was within the realm of possibility (i.e., not bizarre). Other areas of
her functioning were normal. Although mild depressive symptoms were
present, she did not meet criteria for major depressive disorder. Her prior
symptoms of depression appeared to be related to a normal bereavement
reaction and had not required pharmacotherapy or hospitalization. Thus,
her current presentation is one of delusional disorder, persecutory type
and not major depressive disorder with psychotic features. In terms of
treatment, the ability to create a working alliance with the patient,
avoiding the discussion of the veracity of her delusion, and focusing on
her anxiety, depression, and difficulty falling asleep enabled her
psychiatrist to introduce the medications with beneficial results.
(Courtesy of Laura J. Fochtmann, M.D., Ramin Mojtabai, M.D., Ph.D.,
M.P.H., and Evelyn J. Bromet, Ph.D.)

Mr. M was a 51-year-old married white man who lived with his wife in
their own home and who worked full time driving a sanitation truck.
Before his hospitalization, he became concerned that his wife was having
an affair. He began to follow her, kept notes on his observations, and
badgered her constantly about this, often waking her up in the middle of
the night to make accusations. Shortly before admission, these arguments
led to physical violence, and he was brought to the hospital by police. In
addition to concerns about his wife’s fidelity, Mr. M reported feelings of
depression over his wife’s “betrayal of [their] marriage vows,” but he
noted no changes in sleep, appetite, or work-related functioning. He was
treated with a low dose of an antipsychotic medication and described
being less concerned about his wife’s behavior. After discharge, he
remained on medications and was seen by a psychiatrist monthly, but 10
years later, he continued to believe that his wife was unfaithful. His wife
noted that he sometimes became upset about the delusion but that he had
not become aggressive or required readmission.
This patient experienced a fixed, encapsulated delusion of jealousy that
did not interfere with his other activities and that showed a partial




<<<PAGE 1305>>>

of severe anxiety symptoms. In those cases, a short-term benzodiazepine,
such as lorazepam or alprazolam, is helpful in the short term. Concurrently,
an SSRI should be started and slowly increased.
For panic disorder, SSRIs or the serotonin–norepinephrine reuptake
inhibitor (SNRI) venlafaxine are first-line options. Tricyclic antidepressants
or MAOIs are effective but less preferably given their side effects. Other
agents, such as mirtazapine, are other second-line options. As mentioned, the
benzodiazepines are effective options but mainly used for short-term use or
exacerbations. Long-term antidepressant therapy is useful for preventing
relapse, with studies suggesting that the beneficial effects last for up to 1 to 3
years. When appropriate, maintenance therapy should be discontinued very
slowly.
For generalized anxiety disorder, the approach is similar, with SSRIs and
SNRIs being the first-line treatments. Reasonable alternatives if those are not
effective include agomelatine, pregabalin, buspirone, and quetiapine.
For social anxiety disorder, the approach is similar to those already
described, with SSRIs and SNRIs being the first-line choice. Pregabalin and
clonazepam also have strong evidence, although the same caveats for other
benzodiazepines apply to clonazepam. Phenelzine is effective as well but is
rarely used because of the side effects. Tricyclic antidepressants, buspirone,
and quetiapine are not recommended owing to their side effects. As noted
above, β-blockers may be useful for performance anxiety. However, their use
does not appear to generalize to other types of social anxiety.
Table 8-6
Evidence-Based Recommendations for Monotherapy of
Anxiety Disorders
Anxiety Disorders
Classes and
Agents

GAD

PD

SAD

SSRIs

First line

First line

First line

SNRIs

First line

First line

First line

TCAs

Second line

Second line

Not




<<<PAGE 1680>>>

libido in some women, and some drugs with anticholinergic side effects may impair arousal as
well as orgasm. Prolonged use of oral contraceptives may also cause physiologic
menopausal-like changes resulting in genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder.
Benzodiazepines have been reported to decrease libido, but in some patients the diminution
of anxiety caused by those drugs enhances sexual function. Both increase and decrease in
libido have been reported with psychoactive agents. It is difficult to separate those effects
from the underlying condition or from improvement of the condition. Sexual dysfunction
associated with the use of a drug disappears when use of the drug is discontinued.

The MAOIs affect biogenic amines broadly. Accordingly, they produce
impaired erection, delayed or retrograde ejaculation, vaginal dryness, and
inhibited orgasm. Tranylcypromine has a paradoxical sexually stimulating
effect in some persons, possibly as a result of its amphetamine-like
properties.
Mr. W presented with the complaint of inability to achieve orgasm. His
problem dated from the time, 18 months previously, when he started
fluoxetine. Before that time, he had been able to achieve orgasm through
masturbation and coitus with his wife.
Mr. W tried several other SSRIs, as well as venlafaxine, but the side
effect of delayed ejaculation persisted. None of the usual antidotes to
SSRI-induced anorgasmia proved effective, and the patient then tried
antidepressants of other categories. Mr. W was able to respond to
bupropion and clonazepam. This combination treated his depression and
anxiety, and his delayed ejaculation resolved.
His psychiatrist diagnosed pharmacologically induced delayed
ejaculation.
Table 16-13
Diagnostic Issues with Sex and Some Antipsychotic Drugs
Differential diagnosis of druginduced sexual dysfunction

Problem after drug therapy
started or drug overdose
Problem not situation or partner
specific
Not a lifelong or recurrent




<<<PAGE 1815>>>

Table 19-12
Pharmacotherapy of
Personality Disorders

Target

Symptom

Domains

of

Choice of Drugs According to Target Symptoms of Personality
Disorders
Target Symptom

Drug/Treatment of
Choice

Not
Recommended

I. Mood Dysregulation and Anxiety
Anxiety
Chronic cognitive

Psychotherapy,
Benzodiazepines
SSRIs, SNRIs,
MAOIs, Low-Dose
Novel
Psychotropics
(aripiprazole,
quetiapine)
Valproate and other
GABA analogs
(clonazepam and
buspirone)

Chronic somatic

MAOIs, SNRIs
(duloxetine,
milnacipran)
Pregabalin and other
GABA analogs,
TCAs, betablockers

Obsessions

SSRIs, Antipsychotics
(quetiapine), TCAs
(clomipramine),
Mild NMDA
antagonists

If used—
benzodiazepines
with long half-life
and short trials
preferred




<<<PAGE 1816>>>

(riluzole,
memantine)
Acute and severe

Mirtazapine, Novel
Psychotropics
(quetiapine,
aripiprazole,
clozapine), TCAs,
clonazepam,
valproates, lithium

Depression
Atypical
MAOIs, SSRIs,
depression/dysphoria
SNRIs,
Classical depression
Aripiprazole,
Lurasidone,
ziprasidone,
quetiapine,
Atypical
antipsychotics (as
monotherapy or
augmentation)

TCAs

Emotional lability/rapid Lithium, Lamotrigine,
cycling
Valproate, Lowerdose
antipsychotics
(olanzapine,
aripiprazole,
clozapine,
ziprasidone)

TCAs
(“catecholamine
stress”),
Standard
antidepressants
(risk of switching
to mania)

II. Behavior Dyscontrol
Aggression/impulsivity
Affective aggression
Lithium, SSRIs,
“Hot temper” with normal
Anticonvulsants,

Benzodiazepines
(disinhibition)




<<<PAGE 1817>>>

EEG

Low-dose
antipsychotics

Predatory aggression
(cold blooded
revenge/cruelty)

No Effective
Pharmacologic Tx

Benzodiazepines
(disinhibition)

Organic-like aggression
(traumatic brain
injury)

Beta-Blockers,
Valproates,
Quetiapine,
Carbamazepine
(CBMZ), TCAs,
cholinesterase
inhibitors
(donepezil)

Benzodiazepines
(disinhibition,
delirium)

Ictal aggression
(abnormal EEG)

CBMZ,
TCAs, Low-potency
Diphenylhydantoin,
typical
Valproate
antipsychotics
Benzodiazepines
(both increase
(clonazepam)
risk of seizures)

III. Social and Emotional Detachment
Chronic asociality and disinterest
Blunted affect

Low-Dose
Antipsychotics
(aripiprazole,
olanzapine, lowdose clozapine,
sulpiride)

IV. Cognitive-Perceptual Distortions/Psychotic Symptoms
Acute and brief
psychotic episodes

Novel Antipsychotics
(Risperdal,
olanzapine)
Typical neuroleptics
(for the duration of




<<<PAGE 1891>>>

Benzodiazepines
Clonazepam

Klonopin

PO 1 mg bid Akathisia, acute
dystonia

Lorazepam

Ativan

PO 1 mg tid

Buspirone

BuSpar

PO 20–40
mg qid

Tardive dyskinesia

Vitamin E

—

PO 1,200–
1,600
IU/day

Tardive dyskinesia

PO, orally; IM, intramuscularly; IV, intravenously; bid, twice a day; tid, three times a day; qid;
four times a day.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS. The differential diagnosis

includes seizures and

tardive dyskinesia.
COURSE AND PROGNOSIS. Dystonia can fluctuate spontaneously and respond

to reassurance, so the clinician gets the false impression that the movement is
hysterical or entirely under conscious control.
Table 21-4
Treatment of Neuroleptic Malignant Syndrome
Intervention

Dosing

Effectiveness

Amantadine

200–400 mg PO/day in
divided doses

Beneficial as
monotherapy or
in combination;
decrease in
death rate

Bromocriptine

2.5 mg PO bid or tid, may
increase to a total of 45
mg/day

Mortality reduced
as a single or
combined agent

Levodopa/carbidopa Levodopa 50–100 mg/day

Case reports of




<<<PAGE 1910>>>

underdosing than in overshooting the recommended dose range.
The time of dosing is usually based on the plasma half-life of a drug and its
side effect profile. Sedating drugs are given all at night or with
disproportionate daily doses at night. The opposite is true with activating
drugs. The frequency of dosing is not as straightforward as with sedating
drugs. Most dosing regimens of psychotropic drugs, such as once-a-day
versus divided doses, are based on measurements of plasma concentrations
rather than receptor occupancy in the brain. Evidence suggests a significant
dissociation exists between the brain and plasma kinetics. Reliance on plasma
kinetics as the basis for dosing regimens leads to a misunderstanding of
necessary schedules.
As a rule, psychotropic drugs should be used continuously. There are some
possible exceptions, such as when treating insomnia, agitation, or situational
anxiety. A common mistake is the use of high-potency benzodiazepines, such
as alprazolam (Xanax) and clonazepam (Klonopin), only after an attack has
begun. These drugs should be used as part of a regular schedule to prevent
attacks.
Some patients who experience sexual dysfunction while being treated with
SSRIs take a drug holiday; that is, they skip a daily dose from time to time to
facilitate sexual performance.
Intermittent dosing regimens of SSRIs are effective as a treatment for
premenstrual dysphoric disorder (PMDD). The drugs are taken daily during
the 2-week luteal phase of the menstrual cycle.
Duration of Treatment
A common question from a patient is, “How long do I need to take the
medication?” The answer depends on multiple variables. These include the
specific disorder, the symptom duration, and family history. We should also
consider the patient’s tolerance of and benefit from the medication. Patients
can be given a reasonable explanation of the probabilities but should be told
that it is first best to see if the medication works for them and whether any
side effects are acceptable. Any more definitive discussion of treatment
duration can be held once we can assess the degree of success. Even patients
with a philosophical aversion to the use of psychotropic drugs may elect to
stay on the medication indefinitely if the magnitude of improvement is




<<<PAGE 1976>>>

metabolism of the coadministered medication. Each of the SSRIs possesses a
potential for slowing or blocking the metabolism of many drugs (Table 2116). Fluvoxamine is the most problematic of the drugs in this respect. It has a
marked effect on several of the CYP enzymes. Examples of clinically
significant interactions include fluvoxamine and theophylline (Slo-Bid, TheoDur) through CYP1A2 interaction, fluvoxamine and clozapine (Clozaril)
through CYP1A2 inhibition; and fluvoxamine with alprazolam (Xanax) or
clonazepam (Klonopin) through CYP3A4 inhibition. Fluoxetine and
paroxetine also possess significant effects on the CYP2D6 isozyme, which
may interfere with the efficacy of opiate analogs, such as codeine and
hydrocodone, by blocking the conversion of these agents to their active form.
Thus, coadministration of fluoxetine and paroxetine with an opiate interferes
with its analgesic effects. Sertraline, citalopram, and escitalopram are least
likely to complicate treatment because of interactions.
The pharmacokinetics of vilazodone (5 to 80 mg) is dose-proportional.
Steady-state plasma levels are achieved in about 3 days. The elimination of
vilazodone is primarily by hepatic metabolism with a terminal half-life of
approximately 25 hours.
Pharmacodynamics. The SSRIs are believed to exert their therapeutic
effects through serotonin reuptake inhibition. They derive their name because
they have little effect on the reuptake of norepinephrine or dopamine. Often,
adequate clinical activity and saturation of the 5-HT transporters are achieved
at starting dosages. As a rule, higher dosages do not increase antidepressant
efficacy but may increase the risk of adverse effects.
Table 21-16
CYP450 Inhibitory Potential of Commonly Prescribed
Antidepressants




<<<PAGE 2063>>>

The coadministration of lithium and carbamazepine, lamotrigine,
valproate, and clonazepam may increase lithium concentrations and
aggravate lithium-induced neurologic adverse effects. Treatment with the
combination should be initiated at slightly lower dosages than usual, and the
dosages should be increased gradually. Changes from one to another
treatment for mania should be made carefully, with as little temporal overlap
between the drugs as possible.
Most diuretics (e.g., thiazide and potassium-sparing) can increase lithium
concentrations; when treatment with such a diuretic is stopped, the clinician
may need to increase the person’s daily lithium dosage. Osmotic and loop
diuretics, carbonic anhydrase inhibitors, and xanthines (including caffeine)
may reduce lithium concentrations to below therapeutic concentrations.
Whereas ACEIs may cause an increase in lithium concentrations, the AT1
angiotensin II receptor inhibitors losartan (Cozaar) and irbesartan (Avapro)
do not alter lithium concentrations. A wide range of NSAIDs can decrease
lithium clearance, thereby increasing lithium concentrations. These drugs
include indomethacin (Indocin), phenylbutazone (Azolid), diclofenac
(Voltaren), ketoprofen (Orudis), oxyphenbutazone (Oxalid), ibuprofen
(Motrin, Advil), piroxicam (Feldene), and naproxen (Naprosyn). Aspirin and
sulindac (Clinoril) do not affect lithium concentrations.
The coadministration of lithium and quetiapine (Seroquel) may cause
somnolence but is otherwise well tolerated. The coadministration of lithium
and ziprasidone (Geodon) may modestly increase the incidence of tremors.
The coadministration of lithium and calcium channel inhibitors should be
avoided because of potentially fatal neurotoxicity.
A person taking lithium who is about to undergo ECT should discontinue
taking lithium 2 days before beginning ECT to reduce the risk of delirium.
Laboratory Interferences
Lithium does not interfere with any laboratory tests, but lithium-induced
alterations include an increased WBC count, decreased serum thyroxine, and
increased serum calcium. Blood collected in a lithium–heparin anticoagulant
tube will produce falsely elevated lithium concentrations.
Dosage and Clinical Guidelines




<<<PAGE 2078>>>

lethargy (single report); may decrease valproate
serum concentrations
Antidepressants Amitriptyline and fluoxetine may increase valproate
serum concentrations
Diazepam

Serum concentration increased by valproate

Clonazepam

Absence status (rare; reported only in patients with
preexisting epilepsy)

Phenytoin

Serum concentration decreased by valproate

Phenobarbital

Serum concentration increased by valproate;
increased sedation

Other CNS
depressants

Increased sedation

Anticoagulants

Possible potentiation of effect

CNS, central nervous system.

Laboratory Interferences
Valproate may cause a laboratory increase of serum-free fatty acids.
Valproate metabolites may produce a false-positive test result for urinary
ketones as well as falsely abnormal thyroid function test results.
Table 21-35
Recommended Laboratory Tests during Valproate Therapy
Before Treatment
Standard chemistry screen with special attention to liver function
tests
CBC, including WBC and platelet count
During Treatment
Liver function tests at 1 mo; then every 6–24 mo if no
abnormalities are found.
Complete blood count with platelet count at 1 mo; then every 6–
24 mo if findings are normal.




<<<PAGE 2090>>>

consisting of fever, rash, eosinophilia, and possibly fatal myocarditis.
Cleft palate, fingernail hypoplasia, microcephaly, and spina bifida in
infants may be associated with the maternal use of carbamazepine during
pregnancy. Pregnant women should not use carbamazepine unless necessary.
All women with childbearing potential should take 1 to 4 mg of folic acid
daily, even if they are not trying to conceive. Carbamazepine is secreted in
breast milk.
Drug Interactions. Carbamazepine decreases serum concentrations of
numerous drugs as a result of the prominent induction of hepatic CYP3A4
(Table 21-39). Monitoring for a decrease in clinical effects is frequently
indicated. Carbamazepine can decrease the blood concentrations of oral
contraceptives, resulting in breakthrough bleeding and uncertain prophylaxis
against pregnancy. Carbamazepine should not be administered with MAOIs,
which should be discontinued at least 2 weeks before initiating treatment with
carbamazepine. Grapefruit juice inhibits the hepatic metabolism of
carbamazepine. When carbamazepine and valproate are used in combination,
the dosage of carbamazepine should be decreased because valproate displaces
carbamazepine binding on proteins, and the dosage of valproate may need to
be increased.
Table 21-39
Carbamazepine: Drug Interactions
Effect of Carbamazepine on Plasma Agents that May Affect
Concentrations of Concomitant
Carbamazepine Plasma
Agents
Concentrations
Carbamazepine may decrease drug Agents that may increase
plasma concentration of:
carbamazepine plasma
Acetaminophen
concentration:
Alprazolam
Allopurinol
Amitriptyline
Cimetidine
Bupropion
Clarithromycin
Clomipramine
Danazol
Clonazepam
Diltiazem
Clozapine
Erythromycin




<<<PAGE 2114>>>

The absorption, the attainment of peak concentrations, and the onset of
action are quickest for diazepam (Valium), lorazepam (Ativan), alprazolam
(Xanax), triazolam (Halcion), and estazolam (ProSom). The rapid onset of
effects is vital to persons who take a single dose of a benzodiazepine to calm
an episodic burst of anxiety or to fall asleep rapidly. Several benzodiazepines
are effective after intravenous (IV) injection, but only lorazepam and
midazolam (Versed) have rapid and reliable absorption after intramuscular
(IM) administration.
Diazepam, chlordiazepoxide, clonazepam (Klonopin), clorazepate,
flurazepam (Dalmane), and quazepam (Doral) have plasma half-lives of 30
hours to more than 100 hours and are technically described as long-acting
benzodiazepines. The plasma half-lives of these compounds can be as high as
200 hours in persons whose metabolism is genetically slow. Because the
attainment of steady-state plasma concentrations of the drugs can take up to 2
weeks, persons may experience symptoms and signs of toxicity after only 7
to 10 days of treatment with a dosage that seemed initially to be in the
therapeutic range.
Clinically, half-life alone does not necessarily determine the duration of
therapeutic action for most benzodiazepines. The fact that all
benzodiazepines are lipid-soluble to varying degrees means that
benzodiazepines and their active metabolites bind to plasma proteins. The
extent of this binding is proportional to their lipid solubility. The amount of
protein binding varies from 70 to 99 percent. Distribution, onset, and
termination of action after a single dose are thus determined mainly by
benzodiazepine lipid solubility, not elimination half-life. Preparations with
high lipid solubility, such as diazepam and alprazolam, are absorbed rapidly
from the GI tract and distribute rapidly to the brain by passive diffusion along
a concentration gradient, resulting in a rapid onset of action. However, as the
concentration of the medication increases in the brain and decreases in the
bloodstream, the concentration gradient reverses itself, and these medications
leave the brain rapidly, resulting in fast cessation of drug effect. Drugs with
longer elimination half-lives, such as diazepam, may remain in the
bloodstream for a substantially more extended time than their actual
pharmacologic action at benzodiazepine receptors because the concentration
in the brain decreases rapidly below the level necessary for a noticeable
effect.




<<<PAGE 2116>>>

active metabolite (desmethyldiazepam), which has an elimination half-life of
more than 120 hours. Flurazepam (Dalmane), a lipid-soluble benzodiazepine
used as a hypnotic that has a short elimination half-life, has an active
metabolite (desalkylflurazepam) with a half-life greater than 100 hours. This
is another reason that the duration of action of a benzodiazepine may not
correspond to the half-life of the parent drug.
Therapeutic Indications
Insomnia. Because insomnia may be a symptom of a physical or psychiatric
disorder, hypnotics should not be used for more than 7 to 10 consecutive days
without a thorough investigation of the cause of insomnia. However, many
patients have long-standing sleep difficulties and benefit significantly from
the long-term use of hypnotic agents. Temazepam, flurazepam, and triazolam
are benzodiazepines with a sole indication for insomnia.
Flurazepam, temazepam, quazepam, estazolam, and triazolam are the
benzodiazepines approved for use as hypnotics. The benzodiazepine
hypnotics differ principally in their half-lives; flurazepam has the most
prolonged half-life, and triazolam has the shortest. Flurazepam may be
associated with minor cognitive impairment on the day after its
administration, and triazolam may be associated with mild rebound anxiety
and anterograde amnesia. Quazepam may be associated with daytime
impairment when used for a long time. Temazepam or estazolam may be a
reasonable compromise for most adults. Estazolam produces rapid onset of
sleep and a hypnotic effect for 6 to 8 hours.
Anxiety Disorders
GENERALIZED ANXIETY DISORDER. Benzodiazepines are highly effective for the

relief of anxiety associated with GAD. Most persons should be treated for a
predetermined, specific, and relatively brief period. However, because GAD
is a chronic disorder with a high rate of recurrence, some persons with GAD
may warrant long-term maintenance treatment with benzodiazepines.
Alprazolam and clonazepam, both high-potency
benzodiazepines, are commonly used medications for panic disorder with or
without agoraphobia. Although the SSRIs are also indicated for the treatment
PANIC

DISORDER.




<<<PAGE 2117>>>

of panic disorder, benzodiazepines have the advantage of working quickly
and not causing significant sexual dysfunction and weight gain. However, the
SSRIs are still often preferred because they target common comorbid
conditions, such as depression or OCD. Benzodiazepines and SSRIs can be
initiated together to treat acute panic symptoms; use of the benzodiazepine
can be tapered after 3 to 4 weeks once the therapeutic benefits of the SSRI
have emerged.
SOCIAL ANXIETY DISORDER. Clonazepam is an effective treatment for social

anxiety disorder. Also, several other benzodiazepines (e.g., diazepam) have
been used as adjunctive medications for the treatment of social anxiety
disorder.
Benzodiazepines are used adjunctively for
treatment of adjustment disorder with anxiety, pathologic anxiety associated
with life events (e.g., after an accident), OCD, and PTSD.
OTHER ANXIETY DISORDERS.

ANXIETY ASSOCIATED WITH DEPRESSION. Depressed patients often experience

significant anxiety, and antidepressant drugs may cause initial exacerbation
of these symptoms. Accordingly, benzodiazepines are indicated for the
treatment of anxiety associated with depression.
Bipolar I and II Disorders
Clonazepam, lorazepam, and alprazolam are useful in the management of
acute manic episodes and as an adjuvant to maintenance therapy instead of
antipsychotics. As an adjuvant to lithium (Eskalith) or lamotrigine
(Lamictal), clonazepam may result in an increased time between cycles and
fewer depressive episodes. Benzodiazepines may help patients with bipolar
disorder sleep better.
Catatonia. Lorazepam, sometimes in low doses (less than 5 mg/day) and
sometimes in very high doses (12 mg/day or more), is regularly used to treat
acute catatonia, which is more frequently associated with bipolar disorder
than with schizophrenia. Other benzodiazepines have also been said to be
helpful. However, there are no valid controlled trials of benzodiazepines in
catatonia. Chronic catatonia does not respond as well to benzodiazepines.




<<<PAGE 2121>>>

syndrome, depends on how long a person takes the drug, what dose, how
quickly they taper it, and the half-life of the compound. Benzodiazepine
withdrawal syndrome consists of anxiety, nervousness, diaphoresis,
restlessness, irritability, fatigue, lightheadedness, tremor, insomnia, and
weakness (Table 21-44). Abrupt discontinuation of benzodiazepines,
particularly those with short half-lives, is associated with severe withdrawal
symptoms, which may include depression, paranoia, delirium, and seizures.
These severe symptoms are more likely to occur if flumazenil is used for the
rapid reversal of the benzodiazepine receptor agonist effects. Some features
of the syndrome may occur in as many as 90 percent of persons treated with
the drugs. The development of severe withdrawal syndrome is seen only in
persons who have taken high dosages for long periods. The syndrome may be
delayed for 1 or 2 weeks in persons who had been taking benzodiazepines
with long half-lives. Alprazolam seems to be significantly associated with an
immediate and severe withdrawal syndrome and should be tapered gradually.
When the medication is to be discontinued, the drug must be tapered
slowly (25 percent a week); otherwise, recurrence or rebound of symptoms is
likely. Monitoring of any withdrawal symptoms (possibly with a standardized
rating scale) and psychological support of the person are helpful in the
successful accomplishment of benzodiazepine discontinuation. Concurrent
use of carbamazepine (Tegretol) during benzodiazepine discontinuation has
been reported to permit a more rapid and better-tolerated withdrawal than
does a gradual taper alone. The dosage range of carbamazepine used to
facilitate withdrawal is 400 to 500 mg a day. Some clinicians report particular
difficulty in tapering and discontinuing alprazolam, especially in persons who
have been receiving high dosages for long periods. There have been reports
of successful discontinuation of alprazolam by switching to clonazepam,
which is then gradually withdrawn.
Table 21-44
Signs and Symptoms of Benzodiazepine Withdrawal
Anxiety

Tremor

Irritability

Depersonalization

Insomnia

Hyperesthesia




<<<PAGE 2122>>>

Hyperacusis

Myoclonus

Nausea

Delirium

Difficulty concentrating

Seizures

Drug Interactions
The most common and potentially severe benzodiazepine receptor agonist
interaction is excessive sedation and respiratory depression occurring when
benzodiazepines are administered concomitantly with other CNS depressants,
such as alcohol, barbiturates, tricyclic and tetracyclic drugs, DRAs, opioids,
and antihistamines. Ataxia and dysarthria may be likely to occur when
lithium, antipsychotics, and clonazepam are combined. The combination of
benzodiazepines and clozapine (Clozaril) has been reported to cause delirium
and should be avoided. Cimetidine (Tagamet), disulfiram (Antabuse),
isoniazid, estrogen, and oral contraceptives increase the plasma concentration
of diazepam, chlordiazepoxide, clorazepate, and flurazepam. However,
antacids may reduce the GI absorption of benzodiazepines. The plasma
concentrations of triazolam and alprazolam are increased to potentially toxic
concentrations by nefazodone (Serzone) and fluvoxamine (Luvox).
The manufacturer of nefazodone recommends that the dosage of triazolam
be lowered by 75 percent, and the dosage of alprazolam be lowered by 50
percent, when given concomitantly with nefazodone. Over-the-counter
preparations of the kava plant, advertised as a “natural tranquilizer,” can
potentiate the action of benzodiazepine receptor agonists through synergistic
overactivation of GABA receptors. Carbamazepine can lower the plasma
concentration of alprazolam. Antacids and food may decrease the plasma
concentrations of benzodiazepines, and smoking may increase the
metabolism of benzodiazepines. The benzodiazepines may increase the
plasma concentrations of phenytoin and digoxin (Lanoxin). The SSRIs may
prolong and exacerbate the severity of zolpidem-induced hallucinations.
Deaths have been reported when parental lorazepam is given with parental
olanzapine.
Dosage and Clinical Guidelines




<<<PAGE 2123>>>

The clinical decision to treat an anxious person with a benzodiazepine should
be carefully considered. Medical causes of anxiety (e.g., thyroid dysfunction,
caffeinism, and prescription medications) should be ruled out.
Benzodiazepine use should be started at a low dosage, and the person should
be instructed regarding the drug’s sedative properties and abuse potential. An
estimated length of therapy should be decided at the beginning of therapy,
and the need for continued therapy should be reevaluated at least monthly
because of the problems associated with long-term use. However, certain
persons with anxiety disorders are unresponsive to treatments other than
benzodiazepines in long-term use.
Benzodiazepines are available in a wide range of formulations.
Clonazepam is available in a wafer formulation that facilitates its use in
patients who have trouble swallowing pills. Alprazolam is available in an
extended-release form, which reduces the frequency of dosing. Some
benzodiazepines are more potent than others in that one compound requires a
relatively smaller dosage than another compound to achieve the same effect.
For example, clonazepam requires 0.25 mg to achieve the same effect as 5
mg of diazepam; thus, clonazepam is considered a high-potency
benzodiazepine. Conversely, oxazepam has an approximate dosage
equivalence of 15 mg and is a low-potency drug.
Table 21-43 lists preparations and doses of medications discussed in this
chapter.

BUSPIRONE
Buspirone hydrochloride (BuSpar) is classified as an azapirone and is
chemically distinct from other psychotropic agents. It acts on two types of
receptors, serotonin (5-HT) and dopamine (D). It has a high affinity for the 5HT1A serotonin receptor, acting as an agonist or partial agonist, and moderate
affinity for the D2 dopamine receptor, acting as both an agonist and an
antagonist. The approved indication for this psychotropic drug is for the
treatment of GAD. It was initially believed to be a better alternative to the
benzodiazepine drug group because buspirone does not possess
anticonvulsant and muscle relaxant effects. Reports continue to appear that
some patients benefit from the addition of buspirone to their antidepressant
regimen. Its use in this role is more common than its use as an anxiolytic.




<<<PAGE 3624>>>

arithmetic skills, 48
language disorders, 47–48
limb apraxia, 48
memory disorders, 49–50
motor skills, 50
neuropsychological deficits with left/right hemisphere damage,
47, 47t
spatial disorders, 48–49
referral issue, 50
change in functioning over time, 51
decision-making capacity, assessment of, 51
differential diagnosis, 50–51
forensic evaluation, 51
level of functioning, 50
Clinical tracking systems, 874
Clinician-Administered PTSD Scale (CAPS), 41, 44
Clock drawing, 53t, 54, 55f
Clock genes, 992
Clomipramine, 628
in autism spectrum disorder, 129
for OCD in childhood, 206
Clonazepam, 253t, 602
Clonidine, 607, 608, 683, 694–696, 923, 960
for ADHD, 137
dosage and clinical guidelines, 696
pharmacologic actions, 694
precautions and adverse reactions, 695–696
protocols for opioid detoxification, 695t
for PTSD, 173
symptoms of overdose, 696
therapeutic indications, 694–695
for tic disorder, 160
Cloninger, C. Robert, 560
Closed-ended questions, in interview, 15
Closing of interview, 15–16
Clozapine, 591, 593, 600, 732
assessment of serum concentration of, 63




<<<PAGE 3675>>>

Jaffee v. Redmon, 837
Jet lag, 497
Job loss, 584
Judgment, 11
assessment of, 11, 13t
Judgmental interventions, 15
Judgment of line orientation, 53t, 54
Jung, Carl Gustav, 1082–1083
Justice, 829–830
Juvenile sex offenders, 904–905, 905t
Kandel, Eric, 786
Kaplan, Edith, 52
Kaufman Adolescent and Adult Intelligence Test (KAIT), 82t
Kaufman Assessment Battery for Children (K-ABC), 81, 82t
Kaufman Test of Educational Achievement, Brief and Comprehensive
Forms (K-TEA), 82t, 84
Kava, 713
Kernberg, Otto, 1083
Ketalar. See Ketamine
Ketamine, 215, 303, 304, 319, 320–321, 325, 391, 592
Ketamine (Ketalar), 964
Ketanest. See Esketamine
Ketoconazole, 700
Kevorkian, Jack, 864
Khat, 303
Kiddie Schedule for Affective Disorders and Schizophrenia for SchoolAge Children (K-SADS), 75, 77
Kidney, dopamine in, 955
Kinetic Family Drawing (KFD), 83t
Kleine–Levin syndrome, 163, 474, 491, 602
Klein, Melanie, 1083
Kleptomania, 553–554, 555t
Klinefelter syndrome, 21
Klonopin. See Clonazepam
Klüver–Bucy syndrome, 243, 933


