<<<PAGE 315>>>

who was 2 years older, was healthy and developing typically. The family
lived in a rural town in the Midwest.
Dylan was an extremely fussy, active newborn with extended periods
of crying that the pediatrician labeled classic colic. As a newborn, Dylan
seemed to have large ears and strabismus, which the pediatrician said
would probably resolve spontaneously. At 2 months of age, at a regular
pediatric visit, a systolic heart murmur was heard, and
electrocardiography (ECG) revealed a mitral valve prolapse. Because
Dylan was not cyanotic and had no other cardiac symptoms, his
pediatrician monitored him without specific treatment. Although Dylan
became less fussy over time, he remained very active, did not sleep
through the night, and was a picky eater, refusing solid foods.
Milestones were slightly delayed, with Dylan sitting unassisted at 10
months and walking at 18 months. He had delayed language, and,
although his first words appeared at 20 months, Dylan had always made
his wants and needs known. Dylan’s parents were concerned about his
activity level and his developmental delays compared with his sister;
however, the pediatrician reassured them that boys often develop more
slowly than girls in the first 2 years.
When Dylan was 3 years of age, his preschool teacher noted that he
was unable to pay attention, and he was hyperactive compared to his
classmates, prompting his parents to obtain a developmental evaluation.
Results showed modest delays in cognitive, linguistic, and motor
functioning, with a developmental quotient (DQ) of 74. Dylan was
inattentive, shy, and anxious, and he had poor eye contact. Enrolled in a
special kindergarten, Dylan remained in a combination of special
education and mainstreamed classes throughout his academic life.
At 7 years of age, the school psychologist evaluated Dylan, and results
indicated that he met the criteria for a “learning disability” profile. Dylan
had an overall IQ of 66, with close to normal functioning in short-term
memory and pronounced deficits in long-term memory, expressive
language, and visual–spatial functioning. Dylan struggled with writing
tasks and arithmetic but loved science. Due to his significant problems
with inattention and hyperactivity, Dylan was placed on Concerta, which
was beneficial, and titrated up to 54 mg/day. He displayed transient,
intense interests in unusual items, such as vacuum cleaners. When Dylan




<<<PAGE 413>>>

appetite, metabolic side effects such as hyperglycemia, prolactin elevation,
and dyslipidemia, along with other common adverse effects such as fatigue,
drowsiness, dizziness, and drooling, have limited its use in some individuals.
Risperidone should be used with caution in individuals with underlying
cardiac abnormalities or hypotension, since risperidone may contribute to
orthostatic hypotension. In further continuation studies of risperidone in the
treatment of irritability in autism spectrum disorder, persistent efficacy and
tolerability were found over 6 months, with a rapid return of symptoms in
good responders when discontinuing the risperidone. Other drugs studied in
the treatment of irritability in autism spectrum disorder include aripiprazole
and olanzapine.
Two extensive studies utilizing aripiprazole in the treatment of tantrums,
aggression, and self-injury in children and adolescents with autism spectrum
disorder found that aripiprazole was both efficacious and safe. Doses ranged
from 5 to 15 mg/day. The main side effects included sedation, dizziness,
insomnia, akathisia, nausea, and vomiting. Although weight gain was not as
pronounced as with risperidone, it was still considered a moderate adverse
event, with approximately 1.3 to 1.5 kg gained during an 8-week study
period. The weight gain was similar at the lower and higher doses.
Olanzapine, which blocks 5-HT2A and D2 receptors and also blocks
muscarinic receptors, has been studied in children and adolescents with
autism spectrum disorder for the treatment of irritability with a trend toward a
positive response; however, significant weight gain of approximately 3.5 kg
occurred. The main side effect was sedation.
Hyperactivity, Impulsivity, and Inattention. There have been several
randomized placebo-controlled trials of methylphenidate for the treatment of
hyperactivity, impulsivity, and inattention in children and adolescents with
autism spectrum disorder. The Research Units of Pediatric
Psychopharmacology found methylphenidate to be at least moderately
efficacious at doses of 0.25 to 0.5 mg/kg for youth with autism spectrum
disorder and ADHD symptoms. The efficacy of methylphenidate in this
population was less effective than in children with ADHD without autism
spectrum disorder, and children with autism spectrum disorder developed
more frequent side effects, including increased irritability, compared to
ADHD children. A study of methylphenidate in the treatment of hyperactivity




<<<PAGE 426>>>

plan allowing Justin to receive rewards for effort on his homework along
with a trial of stimulant medication. An extensive medical history and
recent physical examination did not reveal any systemic illnesses. After
obtaining a normal ECG, the psychiatrist started Justin on a trial dose of a
short-acting stimulant, methylphenidate at 10 mg, to determine if he
could tolerate a stimulant without any unexpected sensitivities. Justin had
no adverse effects, and soon the doctor switched him to a long-acting
formulation (Concerta), 36 mg, which would last between 10 and 12
hours. Justin became more vigilant in class and seemed to be less restless
and more focused, and his teacher reported that he was not getting out of
his seat as often, although he continued to blurt out in class
inappropriately, and he continued to have difficulty following directions
and forgetting things. Because Justin was not experiencing any adverse
effects and was still displaying some ADHD symptoms, his psychiatrist
increased his Concerta to 54 mg/day. At this dose, Justin was better at
sitting and finishing his classwork and homework. However, he began to
have significant problems with insomnia and was becoming fatigued
from not being able to fall asleep until about 2 AM on a nightly basis. The
child and adolescent psychiatrist and Justin’s parents discussed two
options to address insomnia. One was to add a dose of short-acting
clonidine in the evenings to cause a calming effect along with some
sedative properties. The other was to initiate a methylphenidate
transdermal patch, which could be applied to deliver a similar dose of
methylphenidate throughout the day, and the patch could be removed at
approximately 4 PM or 5 PM to determine which produced the desired
effect for the target symptoms for the most optimal amount of time.
Because the patch may deliver medication for an hour or so after its
removal, Justin would need to try several different removal times to find
the optimal treatment time. Justin’s family and his child psychiatrist
determined that it would be the best next step for Justin to try the
transdermal patch rather than add medication to treat his insomnia. Justin
was tried on the transdermal 20-mg patch and found that if it was
removed by 5 PM, he was able to fall asleep within 30 to 45 minutes after
getting into bed. Despite some mild erythema around the site of the patch,
Justin experienced no other side effects and was glad that he did not have




<<<PAGE 434>>>

TREATMENT
Pharmacotherapy
Pharmacologic treatment is considered the first line of treatment for ADHD.
CNS stimulants are the first choice of agents in that they have the highest
efficacy with generally mild tolerable side effects. Children, adolescents, and
adults with known cardiac risks and abnormalities should not use stimulants.
In healthy youths, both short- and sustained-release preparations have
excellent safety records. The newer preparations aim to maximize the target
effects and minimize the adverse effects in individuals with ADHD who
obtain a partial response from methylphenidate or whose dose was limited by
side effects.
Current strategies favor once a day sustained-release stimulant preparations
for their convenience and diminished rebound side effects. Advantages of the
sustained-release preparations are that a single dose will sustain the effects all
day, and the medication is sustained at an approximately even level in the
body throughout the day. In general the immediate-release preparations are
expected to last 1 to 4 hours and extended-release preparations are expected
to last up to 8 hours, with exceptions for the transdermal patch, which lasts an
hour after it is removed.
Nonstimulant medications approved by the FDA in the treatment of
ADHD include atomoxetine, a norepinephrine uptake inhibitor. Unlike the
stimulants, atomoxetine carries with it a black-box warning for potential
increases in suicidal thoughts or behaviors and requires children with ADHD
to be monitored for these symptoms, similarly to children taking
antidepressants. α-agonists, including clonidine and guanfacine, are also
useful in treating ADHD. The FDA has approved the extended-release form
of clonidine and the extended-release form of guanfacine for the treatment of
ADHD in children 6 years and older. Antidepressants, such as bupropion,
have been used with variable success in the treatment of ADHD. Table 2-16
indicates FDA-approved ages for ADHD medications.)
Stimulant Medications. Methylphenidate and amphetamine preparations
are dopamine agonists; however, the precise mechanism of the stimulant’s




<<<PAGE 435>>>

central action remains unknown. Methylphenidate preparations are highly
effective in up to three-fourths of children with ADHD, with relatively few
adverse effects. Concerta, the 10- to 12-hour extended-release OROS
(osmotic controlled-release extended delivery system) form of
methylphenidate, is administered once daily in the morning and is useful
during school hours as well as after school during the afternoon and early
evening. Both shorter forms of methylphenidate and Concerta have similar
common adverse effects, including headaches, stomachaches, nausea, and
insomnia. Some children experience a rebound effect, in which they become
mildly irritable and appear to be slightly hyperactive for a brief period when
the medication wears off. In children with a history of motor tics, we should
observe them as, in some cases, methylphenidate can exacerbate the tics,
whereas, in other children, the tics are unaffected or even improved. Because
tics wax and wane, it is essential to observe their patterns over some time.
Another common concern about the use of methylphenidate preparations over
long periods is potential growth suppression. During periods of use,
methylphenidate may cause slightly decreased rates of growth, and if used
over many years continuously without any drug holidays, experts have noted
a growth suppression of about several centimeters. When given “drug
holidays” on weekends or summers, children tend to eat more and also make
up the growth. The methylphenidate products can improve ADHD children’s
scores on tasks of vigilance, such as on math calculation tests, the continuous
performance task, and paired associations. Transdermal methylphenidate is
available for children and adolescents. Advantages of this preparation include
an alternative for children who have difficulties swallowing pills, and that the
patch can individualize how many hours per day a given child with ADHD
receives the medication. This option is useful because a child with ADHD
who needs the medication in the late afternoons to do homework but
develops insomnia if the medication is still present after dinner can remove
the patch at the desired time. Thus, individualized delivery time may be
provided for each child by how many hours they wear the patch.
In contrast, oral sustained-release forms of methylphenidate are those in
which the release time continues for 12 hours after swallowing the pill. A
double-blind, randomized study in children with ADHD who wore the
methylphenidate patch for 12 hours at a time, showed the efficacy of the
patch preparation doses ranging from patches delivering 0.45 to 1.8 mg/hr of




<<<PAGE 436>>>

methylphenidate. A delay in the onset of the transdermal medication effect
was approximately an hour. Side effects were similar to oral preparations of
methylphenidate. Approximately half of the children exhibited at least minor
erythematous reactions to the patch; however, these side effects are usually
well tolerated by children on the patch. Dextroamphetamine and
dextroamphetamine/amphetamine salt combinations are usually the second
drugs of choice when methylphenidate fails.
Table 2-16
FDA Approval for ADHD Medications
Medication

Generic Name

FDA
Approval
Age (yr)

Methylphenidate
Concerta

Methylphenidate (OROS long acting) 6 and
older

Ritalin

Methylphenidate

6 and
older

Ritalin LA

Methylphenidate (long acting)

6 and
older

Metadate ER

Methylphenidate (extended release) 6 and
older

Metadate CD

Methylphenidate (extended release) 6 and
older

Methylin

Methylphenidate (oral solution and
chewable tablet)

6 and
older

Daytrana

Methylphenidate (patch)

6 and
older

Adhansia XR

Methylphenidate (extended release) 6 and
older




<<<PAGE 437>>>

Aptensio XR

Methylphenidate (extended release) 6 and
older

Cotempla XR-ODT Methylphenidate (extended-release
orally disintegrating tablet)

6–17

Jornay PM

Methylphenidate (extended release) 6 and
older

Quillichew

Methylphenidate (extended-release
chewable)

6 and
older

Quillivant ER

Methylphenidate (extended-release
suspension)

6 and
older

Focalin

Dexmethylphenidate

6 and
older

Focalin XR

Dexmethylphenidate (extended
release)

6 and
older

Dextroamphetamine

3 and
older

Adzenys ER

Amphetamine (extended-release
suspension)

6–12

Adzenys XR-ODT

Amphetamine (extended-release
orally disintegrating tablet)

6–17

Dynavel XR

Amphetamine (extended-release
suspension)

6 and
older

Evekeo

Amphetamine

3 and
older

Evekeo ODT

Amphetamine (orally disintegrating

6–17

Dexmethylphenidate

Dextroamphetamine
Dexedrine
Amphetamine




<<<PAGE 438>>>

tablet)
Dextroamphetamine/amphetamine
Adderall

Dextroamphetamine/amphetamine

3 and
older

Adderall XR

Dextroamphetamine/amphetamine
(extended release)

6 and
older

Mydayis

Dextroamphetamine/amphetamine
(extended release)

13 and
older

Lisdexamfetamine

6 and
older

Atomoxetine

6 and
older

Kapvay

Clonidine (extended release)

6–17

Intuniv

Guanfacine (extended release)

6–17

Lisdexamfetamine
Vyvanse
Nonstimulants
Strattera
Alpha Agonists

CNS STIMULANT SIDE EFFECTS. CNS stimulants are generally well tolerated,

and the current consensus is that once a day dosing is preferable for
convenience and to minimize rebound side effects. Long-term tolerability of
once-daily mixed amphetamine salts has shown mild side effects, most
commonly decreased appetite, insomnia, and headache. There are a variety of
strategies for children or adolescents with ADHD who respond favorably to
methylphenidate, but for whom insomnia has become a significant problem.
Clinical strategies to manage insomnia include the use of diphenhydramine
(25 to 75 mg), a low dose of trazodone (25 to 50 mg), or the addition of an αadrenergic agent, such as guanfacine. In some cases, insomnia may attenuate
on its own after several months of treatment.




<<<PAGE 441>>>

help treat adults with ADHD. Only one randomized, double-blind, placebocontrolled study of the efficacy and safety of modafinil film-coated tablets in
approximately 250 adolescents with ADHD showed that 48 percent of those
on active treatment were rated as “much” or “very much” improved
compared with 17 percent of patients receiving placebo. The dosage range
was from 170 to 425 mg administered once daily, titrated to optimal doses
based on efficacy and tolerability. Modafinil failed to receive FDA approval
based on a Stevens–Johnson skin rash that occurred in a patient during the
trial. The most common side effects included insomnia, headache, and
decreased appetite.
Some clinicians use venlafaxine, especially for children and adolescents,
with combinations of ADHD and depression or anxiety features. No clear
empirical evidence supports the use of venlafaxine in the treatment of
ADHD.
One open-label report of reboxetine, a selective norepinephrine reuptake
inhibitor that is not available in the US, in 31 children and adolescents with
ADHD who were resistant to methylphenidate treatment, suggested that this
agent may have efficacy. In this open trial, reboxetine was initiated and
maintained at 4 mg/day. The most common side effects included drowsiness,
sedation, and gastrointestinal symptoms. Reboxetine and other new agents in
this class await controlled studies.
Monitoring Pharmacologic Treatment
STIMULANTS. Stimulant medications have adrenergic effects and cause
moderate increases in blood pressure and pulse rate. At baseline, the most
recent American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry (AACAP)
practice parameters recommend the following workup before starting the use
of stimulant medications: physical examination, blood pressure, pulse,
weight, and height. Screening electrocardiograms are recommended prior to
initiating stimulant medications, particularly if there is a family history or risk
factors for cardiac disease.
Children and adolescents using stimulants should have their height, weight,
blood pressure, and pulse checked quarterly and have a physical examination
annually. Monitoring starts with the initiation of medication. Because school
performance is most markedly affected, we should give individual attention




<<<PAGE 501>>>

activity level and argumentative and aggressive behavior, his
kindergarten teacher encouraged the family to obtain a psychiatric
consultation. Jake’s pediatrician made a diagnosis of ADHD and
recommended a trial of Concerta (methylphenidate extended-release
tablets) at 36 mg/day, which Jake began in the first grade. Within a week
of starting medication, Jake’s overly active and impulsive behavior
showed a dramatic improvement; however, he remained argumentative
and oppositional. However, when on his Concerta, Jake was able to stay
in his seat and complete his work and was better able to wait his turn on
the playground. The next few months went well; however, by early
spring, Jake seemed to be returning to some of his old ways. He disrupted
the class, talking out of turn and getting out of his seat. After an increase
in Concerta to 54 mg/day, in the spring of his first-grade year, however,
he began showing motor and phonic tics consisting of head-jerking, facial
movements, coughing, and grunting. He discontinued the Concerta to see
if this made a difference and, although the tics transiently decreased, they
came back in full force within a month. In hindsight, Jake’s mother
recalled that Jake had exhibited eye blinking and grunting before starting
the Concerta, but she had dismissed these events as unimportant, and they
did not seem to disrupt Jake’s daily life.
While Jake was off Concerta during a period when he began middle
school in the sixth grade, he was disruptive to his classes, and he began to
be severely teased by several classmates for his impulsivity, frequent
motor tics, and loud grunting and throat clearing. Jake became
despondent and began to refuse to go to school. At this point, his parents
and clinicians decided to place Jake in a special education class.
However, after several months of this placement, Jake felt worse about
himself, despised school, and begged to be returned to regular classes. At
this point, Jake’s pediatrician made the referral to a child and adolescent
psychiatrist at a local university Tourette Disorder Clinic.
During his evaluation at the Tourette Disorder Clinic, Jake was a
healthy child who was the product of an uncomplicated pregnancy, labor,
and delivery, and whose developmental milestones were appropriate.
Intellectual testing completed by the school psychologist revealed a fullscale IQ of 105. Jake’s mother noted that Jake has had longstanding
trouble falling asleep but sleeps through the night. Jake has always been




<<<PAGE 503>>>

was able to manage the urge without performing the tic. The treatment
team referred Jake to a child and adolescent psychiatrist who decided to
re-start the Concerta at 36 mg/day and titrated it back up to 54 mg/day
without worsening of the tics. Jake responded well to his behavioral
therapy, and over 8 weeks, he had learned how to become aware of the
urges that occurred before his tics and to replace his usual tics with lessdistressing and less-disruptive behaviors.
However, when Jake entered the seventh grade, he had an exacerbation
of his motor and vocal tics and was also touching objects repeatedly
throughout the day. Jake again became despondent, not wanting to go to
school. It was decided by his psychologist to add relaxation training to
his behavioral treatment, and his child and adolescent psychiatrist added
another medication to his pharmacologic regimen. His psychiatrist
prescribed risperidone, 0.5 mg/day, which was titrated up to 1 mg twice
daily. Jake became stabilized within a month and was able to continue in
his school and even went to some parties. Jake and his parents understood
the waxing and waning nature of his tics and were hopeful that they
would begin to see some decrease in his tic symptoms within the next
few years. At follow-up, when Jake was 15 years of age, Jake had
minimal tic symptoms; an occasional eye blink and rare throat clearing
was all that was observable. Jake was not currently in behavioral
treatment. However, over the years, he had, on a few occasions, received
some booster therapy sessions to brush up on his habit reversal training
when he had a minor exacerbation of tics. Jake had been taken off his
risperidone 2 years before without exacerbation of tics. Jake continued
well controlled on Concerta, did well in school, and became more
popular after joining the soccer team. (Adapted from L. Scahill M.S.N.,
Ph.D. and J.F. Leckman, M.D.)
Table 2-23
Clinical Assessment Tools in Tic Disorders
Domain

Type

Reliability Sensitive
and
to
Validity
Change




<<<PAGE 676>>>

marijuana use is associated with changes in cerebral blood flow to specific
brain regions, which can be detected by PET. Functional imaging studies
suggest that there is less activity in brain regions involved with attention and
memory in chronic marijuana users. A 15-year follow-up of 50,465 Swedish
males in the military reported that participants who had used marijuana by 18
years of age were 2.4 times more likely to develop schizophrenia. Risks
associated with chronic marijuana use include higher rates of motor vehicle
accidents, impaired respiratory function, increased risk of cardiovascular
disease, and potential increased risk for psychotic symptoms and disorders.
Cocaine
Cocaine can be sniffed or snorted, injected, or smoked. Crack is the term
given to cocaine that has been changed to a free base for smoking. Cocaine’s
effects include constriction of peripheral blood vessels, dilated pupils,
hyperthermia, increased heart rate, and hypertension. High doses or
prolonged use of cocaine can induce paranoid thinking. There is an
immediate risk of death secondary to cardiac arrest or from seizures followed
by respiratory arrest. In contrast to stimulants used to treat ADHD, such as
methylphenidate, cocaine quickly crosses the blood-brain barrier and moves
off the dopamine transporter within 20 minutes; methylphenidate remains
bound to dopamine for long periods.
Heroin
Heroin, a derivative of morphine, is produced from a poppy plant. Heroin
usually appears as a white or brown powder that users can snort, but more
commonly, they take it intravenously. Withdrawal symptoms include
restlessness, muscle and bone pain, insomnia, diarrhea and vomiting, cold
flashes with goosebumps, and kicking movements. Withdrawal occurs within
a few hours after use; symptoms peak between 48 and 72 hours later and
remit within about a week.
Club Drugs
Adolescents who frequent nightclubs, raves, bars, or music clubs also
frequently use MDMA, GHB, flunitrazepam (Rohypnol), and ketamine.
GHB, flunitrazepam (a benzodiazepine), and ketamine (an anesthetic) are




<<<PAGE 1558>>>

frustrated and concerned about sleeplessness and its effect on her work.
Her work involves sitting at a microscope for 6 hours out of a 9-hour
working day and meticulously documenting her findings. Her final output
has not suffered, but she must now “double check” for accuracy.
She describes herself as a worrier and a Type-A personality. The
patient does not know how to relax. For example, on vacation she
continually worries about things that can go wrong. She will not even
begin to unwind until she has arrived at the destination, checked in, and
unpacked. Even then, she is unable to relax.
Medical history is unremarkable except for tonsillectomy (age 16
years),
migraine
headaches
(current),
and
diet-controlled
hypercholesterolemia. She takes naproxen as needed for headache. She
does not currently drink caffeinated beverages, smoke tobacco, or drink
alcoholic beverages. She does not use recreational drugs.
The problem with insomnia began after relocation to a new city and
place of employment. She attributes her insomnia to the noisy
neighborhood in which she now lives. She first sought treatment 18
months ago. Her family practice physician diagnosed depression, and she
was started on fluoxetine that made her “climb the walls.” Antihistamines
were tried next with similar results. She was then switched to low-dose
trazodone (for sleep) and developed nausea. After these medical
interventions, she sought medical care elsewhere. Zolpidem 5 mg was
prescribed, but it made her feel drugged and upon discontinuation she had
withdrawal effects. Another family practice physician diagnosed
“nonspecific anxiety disorder” and began buspirone; an experience she
describes as “having an alien try to climb out of my skin.” Buspirone was
discontinued. Paroxetine was tried for 8 weeks with no effect. Finally, a
psychiatrist was consulted, who diagnosed adult attention-deficit disorder
(without hyperactivity) and suggested treatment with methylphenidate. At
this point, the patient was convinced that a stimulant would not help her
insomnia and demanded referral to a sleep disorders center.
DISCUSSION
Ms. W’s symptoms fall into the broad category of an insomnia, and the
symptoms began after having moved from one city to another.
Environmental sleep disorder (noise) and adjustment sleep disorder (new




<<<PAGE 2152>>>

poststroke depression, dementia, closed head injury) as well as in the
augmentation of antidepressant medications in specific treatment-resistant
depressions.
Atomoxetine is included in this section because it is used to treat ADHD,
even though it is not a psychostimulant.
Pharmacologic Actions
All of these drugs are well absorbed from the GI tract. Amphetamine
(Adderall) and dextroamphetamine (Dexedrine, Dextrostat) reach peak
plasma concentrations in 2 to 3 hours and have a half-life of about 6 hours,
thereby necessitating once- or twice-daily dosing. Methylphenidate is
available in immediate-release (Ritalin), sustainedrelease (Ritalin SR), and extended-release (Concerta) formulations.
Immediate-release methylphenidate reaches peak plasma concentrations in 1
to 2 hours and has a short half-life of 2 to 3 hours, thereby necessitating
multiple-daily dosing. The sustained-release formulation reaches peak plasma
concentrations in 4 to 5 hours and doubles the effective half-life of
methylphenidate. The extended-release formulation reaches peak plasma
concentrations in 6 to 8 hours and is designed to be effective for 12 hours in
once-daily dosing. Dexmethylphenidate (Focalin) reaches peak plasma
concentration in about 3 hours and is prescribed twice daily.
Lisdexamfetamine dimesylate, also known as L-lysine D-amphetamine
(Vyvanse), is an amphetamine prodrug. In this formulation,
dextroamphetamine is coupled with the amino acid L-lysine.
Lisdexamfetamine becomes active upon cleavage of the lysine portion of the
molecule by enzymes in the red blood cells. This results in the gradual
release of dextroamphetamine into the bloodstream. Apart from having an
extended duration of action, this formulation reduces its abuse potential. It is
the only prodrug of its kind. Lisdexamfetamine is indicated for the treatment
of ADHD in children 6 years and up and in adults as an integral part of a total
treatment program that may include other measures (i.e., psychological,
educational, social). The safety and efficacy of lisdexamfetamine dimesylate
in patients 3 to 5 years old has not been established. In contrast to Adderall,
which contains approximately 75 percent dextroamphetamine and 25 percent
levoamphetamine, lisdexamfetamine is a single, dextro-enantiomer




<<<PAGE 2153>>>

amphetamine molecule. In most cases, this makes the drug better tolerated,
but some patients experience a more significant benefit from the mixed
isomer preparation.
Methylphenidate, dextroamphetamine, and amphetamine are indirectly
acting sympathomimetics, with the primary effect causing the release of
catecholamines from presynaptic neurons. Their clinical effectiveness is
associated with increased release of both dopamine and norepinephrine.
Dextroamphetamine and methylphenidate are also weak inhibitors of
catecholamine reuptake and inhibitors of monoamine oxidase.
In recent years, there has been an explosion of new brand name stimulants.
Most of these are variations of the generic methylphenidate or mixed
amphetamine salts that provide additional options to customize treatment in
terms of dosing and duration of effect.
For modafinil, the specific mechanism of action is unknown. Narcolepsy–
cataplexy results from a deficiency of hypocretin, a hypothalamic
neuropeptide. Hypocretin-producing neurons are activated after modafinil
administration. Modafinil does not appear to work through a dopaminergic
mechanism. It does have α1-adrenergic agonist properties, which may
account for its alerting effects, because the wakefulness induced by modafinil
can be attenuated by prazosin, an α1-adrenergic antagonist. Some evidence
suggests that modafinil has some norepinephrine reuptake blocking effects.
Armodafinil (Nuvigil) is the R-enantiomer of modafinil. Both drugs have
similar clinical effects and side effects.
Therapeutic Indications
Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD). Sympathomimetics
are the first-line drugs for the treatment of ADHD in children and are
effective about 75 percent of the time. Methylphenidate and
dextroamphetamine are equally effective and work within 15 to 30 minutes.
Sympathomimetic drugs decrease hyperactivity, increase attentiveness, and
reduce impulsivity. They may also reduce comorbid oppositional behaviors
associated with ADHD. Many persons take these drugs throughout their
schooling and beyond. In responsive persons, the use of a sympathomimetic
may be a critical determinant of scholastic success.
Sympathomimetics improve the core ADHD symptoms of hyperactivity,




<<<PAGE 2154>>>

impulsivity, and inattentiveness and permit improved social interactions with
teachers, family, other adults, and peers. The success of long-term treatment
of ADHD with sympathomimetics, which are efficacious for most of the
various constellations of ADHD symptoms present from childhood to
adulthood, supports a model in which ADHD results from a genetically
determined neurochemical imbalance that requires lifelong pharmacologic
management.
Methylphenidate is the most commonly used initial agent at a dosage of 5
to 10 mg every 3 to 4 hours. Dosages may be increased to a maximum of 20
mg four times daily or 1 mg/kg a day. Use of the 20-mg sustained-release
formulation to achieve 6 hours of benefit and eliminate the need for dosing at
school is supported by many experts, although other authorities believe it is
less effective than the immediate-release formulation. Dextroamphetamine is
about twice as potent as methylphenidate on a per milligram basis and
provides 6 to 8 hours of benefit. Some 70 percent of nonresponders to one
sympathomimetic may benefit from another. All of the sympathomimetic
drugs should be tried before switching to drugs of a different class. The
previous dictum that sympathomimetics worsen tics and, therefore, should be
avoided by persons with comorbid ADHD and tic disorders has been
questioned. Small dosages of sympathomimetics do not appear to cause an
increase in the frequency and severity of tics. Alternatives to
sympathomimetics for ADHD include bupropion (Wellbutrin), venlafaxine
(Effexor), guanfacine (Tenex), clonidine (Catapres), and tricyclic drugs.
Further studies are needed to determine whether modafinil improves the
symptoms of ADHD.
Short-term use of sympathomimetics induces a euphoric feeling; however,
tolerance develops for both the euphoric feeling and the sympathomimetic
activity.
Narcolepsy and Hypersomnolence. Narcolepsy consists of sudden
sleep attacks (narcolepsy), sudden loss of postural tone (cataplexy), loss of
voluntary motor control going into (hypnagogic) or coming out of
(hypnopompic) sleep (sleep paralysis), and hypnagogic or hypnopompic
hallucinations. Sympathomimetics reduce narcoleptic sleep attacks and
improve wakefulness in other types of hypersomnolent states. Modafinil is
approved as an antisomnolence agent for the treatment of narcolepsy, for




<<<PAGE 2157>>>

taking a sympathomimetic develops one of these movement disorders, a
correlation between the dose of the medication and the severity of the
disorder must be firmly established before adjustments are made in the
medication dosage. In severe cases, augmentation with risperidone
(Risperdal), clonidine (Catapres), or guanfacine (Tenex) is necessary.
Methylphenidate may worsen tics in one-third of persons; these persons fall
into two groups: those whose methylphenidate-induced tics resolve
immediately upon the metabolism of the dosage, and a smaller group in
whom methylphenidate appears to trigger tics that persist for several months
but eventually resolve spontaneously.
Table 21-49
Management of Common Stimulant-Induced Adverse Effects
in Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder
Adverse Effect

Management

Anorexia,
nausea,
weight loss

• Administer stimulant with meals.
• Use caloric-enhanced supplements. Discourage
forcing meals.

Insomnia,
nightmares

• Administer stimulants earlier in day.
• Change to short-acting preparations.
• Discontinue afternoon or evening dosing.
• Consider adjunctive treatment (e.g.,
antihistamines, clonidine, antidepressants).

Dizziness

• Monitor BP.
• Encourage fluid intake.
• Change to long-acting form.

Rebound
phenomena

• Overlap stimulant dosing.
• Change to long-acting preparation or combine
long- and short-acting preparations.
• Consider adjunctive or alternative treatment
(e.g., clonidine, antidepressants).

Irritability

• Assess timing of phenomena (during peak or




<<<PAGE 2160>>>

according to the therapeutic needs and response of the patient.
Lisdexamfetamine (Vyvanse) should be administered at the lowest effective
dosage. In patients who are either starting treatment for the first time or
switching from another medication, 30 mg once daily in the morning is the
recommended dose. Dosages may go up or down in 10 or 20 mg increments
in intervals of approximately 1 week. Patients should avoid taking the drug in
the afternoon, as this may cause insomnia. The drug may be taken with or
without food.
Dextroamphetamine, methylphenidate, amphetamine, benzphetamine, and
methamphetamine are schedule II drugs and, in some states, require triplicate
prescriptions. Phendimetrazine (Adipost, Bontril) and phenmetrazine
(Prelude) are schedule III drugs, and modafinil, armodafinil, phentermine,
diethylpropion (Tenuate), and mazindol (Mazanor, Sanorex) are schedule IV
drugs.
Pretreatment evaluation should include an evaluation of the patient’s
cardiac function, with particular attention to the presence of hypertension or
tachyarrhythmias. The clinician should also examine the patient for the
presence of movement disorders, such as tics and dyskinesia, because the
administration of sympathomimetics can exacerbate these conditions. If tics
are present, many experts will not prescribe sympathomimetics but will
instead choose clonidine or antidepressants. However, recent data indicate
that sympathomimetics may cause only a mild increase in motor tics and may
suppress vocal tics. Liver function and renal function should be assessed, and
dosages of sympathomimetics should be reduced for persons with impaired
metabolism.
Table 21-50
Selected
Sympathomimetics
Psychiatry

Commonly

Used

in




<<<PAGE 2162>>>

Vyvanse

Adderall IR

Dexedrine

70 mg

30 mg

22.5 mg

50 mg

20 mg

15 mg

30 mg

10 mg

7.5 mg

XR, extended release; IR, immediate-release.

Persons with ADHD can take immediate-release methylphenidate at 8 AM,
12 noon, and 4 PM. Dextroamphetamine, Adderall, sustainedrelease methylphenidate, or 18 mg of extended-release methylphenidate may
be taken once at 8 AM. The starting dose of methylphenidate ranges from 2.5
mg of regular to 20 mg of the sustained-release formulation. If this is
inadequate, it may be increased to a maximum dose of 80 mg in children and
90 mg daily in adults. The dosage of dextroamphetamine is 2.5 to 40 mg a
day up to 0.5 mg/kg a day.
The starting dosage of modafinil is 200 mg in the morning in medically
healthy individuals and 100 mg in the morning in persons with hepatic
impairment. Some persons take a second 100- or 200-mg dose in the
afternoon. The maximum recommended daily dosage is 400 mg, although
dosages of 600 to 1,200 mg a day have been used safely. Adverse effects
become prominent at dosages greater than 400 mg a day. Compared with
amphetamine-like drugs, modafinil promotes wakefulness but produces less
attentiveness and less irritability. Some persons with excessive daytime
sleepiness extend the activity of the morning modafinil dose with an
afternoon dose of methylphenidate. Armodafinil is virtually identical to
modafinil but is dosed differently, the dosing range being 50 to 250 mg daily.

ATOMOXETINE (STRATTERA)
Atomoxetine is the first nonstimulant drug to be approved by the FDA as a
treatment of ADHD in children, adolescents, and adults. It is included in this
chapter because it shares this indication with the stimulants described earlier.
Pharmacologic Actions
Atomoxetine is believed to produce a therapeutic effect through selective




<<<PAGE 2192>>>

over 200 lb); check BP after 1 hr. If diastolic BP >70 mm Hg and
no symptoms of hypotension, begin treatment as follows:
Weight (lb)

Number of Clonidine Patches

<110

1 patch

110–160

2 patches

160–200

2 patches

>200

2 patches

OR
Test dose of oral clonidine 0.1 mg; check BP after 1 hr (if systolic BP
<90 mm Hg, do not give patch)
Place two TTS-2 clonidine patches (or three patches if patient weighs
>150 lb) on hairless area of upper body; then
For first 23 hr after patch application, give oral clonidine 0.2 mg q6h;
then
For next 24 hr, give oral clonidine 0.1 mg q6h
Change patches weekly
After 2 wk of two patches, switch to one patch (or two patches if
patient weighs >150 lb)
After 1 wk of one patch, discontinue patches
BP, blood pressure; PO, oral; q, every; SL, sublingual; TTS, through the skin.
From American Society of Addiction Medicine. Detoxification: principle and protocols. In: The
Principles Update Series: Topics in Addiction Medicine, Section 11. American Society of
Addiction; 1997, with permission.

Clonidine and guanfacine can be combined with methylphenidate (Ritalin)
or dextroamphetamine (Dexedrine) to treat hyperactivity and inattentiveness,
respectively. A small number of cases have been reported of the sudden death
of children taking clonidine together with methylphenidate; however, it has
not been conclusively demonstrated that these medications contributed to
these deaths. The clinician should explain to the family that the efficacy and




<<<PAGE 2691>>>

experience with medically ill patients show that the pharmacologic treatment
of depression can be useful even when definable medical causes exist and
even in the last days of life.
A patient with diabetes and end-stage renal disease who had been on
dialysis for 2 years was diagnosed with depression with marked insomnia
and was started on 15 mg by mouth every day of mirtazapine, which
helped her sleep immediately and showed an antidepressant effect within
3 weeks. Four weeks later, she was admitted to the hospital in congestive
heart failure for what was to be her terminal admission. She did not wish
to give up the antidepressant but now felt oversedated and wished that
she could be more alert during the day to interact with her loved ones.
She was started on methylphenidate 5 mg by mouth twice daily, after
which she was more alert, engaged, and communicative with her family.
On her death, her family was grateful to have been able to connect with
her until the end.

CONFUSIONAL STATES IN PATIENTS WITH ADVANCED
DISEASE
The prevalence of delirium rises to 85 percent in patients with advanced
disease. If one includes the last hours of life, it nears 100 percent unless the
patient lapses rapidly into a coma or dies of an acute event, such as
pulmonary embolus. Acute events are always unexpected and traumatize the
survivors even though they knew full well that the patient was near the end of
life. Some patients slip into an irreversible coma, leaving families in a
bedside vigil, which may give them a period of adaptation before the final
instant of death. However, for some 75 to 85 percent of patients, death is
associated with a period of delirium.
Patients frequently experience some disorientation, impaired memory,
concentration, and altered arousal as they become increasingly ill. These
symptoms may remain mild or may be the harbingers of full delirium.
Clinicians should be aware that mild and early signs of delirium are often
mistaken for depression, anxiety, and poor coping.


