<<<PAGE 1817>>>

EEG

Low-dose
antipsychotics

Predatory aggression
(cold blooded
revenge/cruelty)

No Effective
Pharmacologic Tx

Benzodiazepines
(disinhibition)

Organic-like aggression
(traumatic brain
injury)

Beta-Blockers,
Valproates,
Quetiapine,
Carbamazepine
(CBMZ), TCAs,
cholinesterase
inhibitors
(donepezil)

Benzodiazepines
(disinhibition,
delirium)

Ictal aggression
(abnormal EEG)

CBMZ,
TCAs, Low-potency
Diphenylhydantoin,
typical
Valproate
antipsychotics
Benzodiazepines
(both increase
(clonazepam)
risk of seizures)

III. Social and Emotional Detachment
Chronic asociality and disinterest
Blunted affect

Low-Dose
Antipsychotics
(aripiprazole,
olanzapine, lowdose clozapine,
sulpiride)

IV. Cognitive-Perceptual Distortions/Psychotic Symptoms
Acute and brief
psychotic episodes

Novel Antipsychotics
(Risperdal,
olanzapine)
Typical neuroleptics
(for the duration of




<<<PAGE 1959>>>

intravenous (IV) infusion, repeated within 1 hour as necessary. Too much
physostigmine is dangerous, and symptoms of physostigmine toxicity include
hypersalivation and sweating. Atropine sulfate (0.5 mg) can reverse the
effects of physostigmine toxicity.
Cardiac Effects. The DRAs decrease cardiac contractility, disrupt enzyme
contractility in cardiac cells, increase circulating levels of catecholamines,
and prolong atrial and ventricular conduction time and refractory periods.
Low-potency DRAs, particularly the phenothiazines, are usually more
cardiotoxic than are high-potency drugs. One exception is haloperidol, which
has been linked to abnormal heart rhythm, ventricular arrhythmias, torsades
de pointes, and sudden death when injected IV. Pimozide, sulpiride, and
droperidol (a butyrophenone) also prolong the QTc interval and have been
associated with torsades de pointes and sudden death. In one study,
thioridazine was responsible for 28 (61 percent) of the 46 sudden
antipsychotic deaths. In 15 of these cases, it was the only drug ingested.
Chlorpromazine also causes prolongation of the QT and PR intervals,
blunting of the T waves, and depression of the ST segment. These drugs are
thus indicated only when other agents have been ineffective.
Sudden Death. Occasional reports of sudden cardiac death during
treatment with DRAs may be the result of cardiac arrhythmias. Other causes
may include seizure, asphyxiation, malignant hyperthermia, heatstroke, and
neuroleptic malignant syndrome. However, there does seem to be an overall
increased incidence of sudden death with antipsychotics.
Orthostatic (Postural) Hypotension. Orthostatic (postural) hypotension
is most frequent with low-potency drugs, particularly chlorpromazine,
thioridazine, and chlorprothixene. When using intramuscular (IM) lowpotency DRAs, the clinician should measure the patient’s BP (lying and
standing) before and after the first dose and during the first few days of
treatment.
Orthostatic hypotension is mediated by adrenergic blockade and occurs
most frequently during the first few days of treatment. Tolerance often
develops for this side effect, which is why the initial dosing of these drugs is
lower than the usual therapeutic dose. Fainting or falls, although uncommon,


