<<<PAGE 633>>>

the treatment of anxiety disorders in children and adolescents.
A large, multisite investigation by the NIMH (Research Units in Pediatric
Psychopharmacology [RUPP]) confirmed the safety and efficacy of
fluvoxamine in the treatment of childhood separation anxiety disorder,
generalized anxiety disorder, and social anxiety disorder. This double-blind,
placebo-controlled study of 128 children and adolescents revealed that 76
percent of children in the group treated with fluvoxamine showed significant
improvement compared with 29 percent of those in the placebo group.
Response to medication was noticeable after only 2 weeks of treatment.
Fluvoxamine dosages ranged from 50 to 250 mg/day in children and up to
300 mg/day in adolescents. Children and adolescents with less comorbid
depressive symptoms had the best response. Youths who responded
continued fluvoxamine for 6 months, and almost all of them continued to be
responders at the 6-month mark.
Several other randomized clinical trials have also supported the efficacy of
SSRIs in the treatment of child and adolescent anxiety disorders. A
randomized, controlled trial found fluoxetine, at a dose of 20 mg/day, to be
safe and effective for children with these disorders, with minor side effects
including gastrointestinal distress, headache, and drowsiness. Also, a
randomized clinical trial for the treatment of generalized anxiety disorder in
children lends support for the efficacy of sertraline. Finally, a large industry
randomized clinical trial of paroxetine in the treatment of children with social
anxiety disorder found that paroxetine was associated with a response in 78
percent of children treated. The dose of paroxetine was 10 to 50 mg/day.
The FDA has placed a “black box” warning on antidepressants, including
all of the SSRI agents, used in the treatment of any childhood disorder,
because of concerns about increased suicidality; however, no individual
childhood anxiety study has found a statistically significant increase in
suicidal thoughts or behaviors.
Currently, we do not recommend using tricyclic drugs due to their
potentially serious cardiac adverse effects. Other agents, including buspirone
and β-adrenergic receptor antagonists such as propranolol, have been used
clinically in children with anxiety disorders, but currently, no data support
their efficacy. Diphenhydramine may be used in the short term to control
sleep disturbances in children with anxiety disorders. Open trials and one
double-blind, placebo-controlled study suggested that alprazolam, a




<<<PAGE 653>>>

intervention in the treatment of OCD in youth increases the response rates. A
controlled comparison of family CBT and psychoeducation and relaxation
(PRT) in 71 families of children with OCD showed that clinical remission
rates in the FCBT group were significantly higher than those in the PRT
group. The FCBT treatment reduced parent involvement and accommodation
in their affected child’s symptoms, which led to decreased symptomatology.
A randomized controlled study investigating web-camera delivered FCBT
(W-CBT) compared to a waitlist condition assigned 31 families to one of the
above conditions. Assessments were conducted immediately before and after
treatment and at a 3-month follow-up for the W-CBT group. The W-CBT
group was superior to the waitlist control group on all primary outcome
measures, with large effect sizes. Eighty-one percent of the W-CBT group
responded, compared to 13 percent of the waitlist group. The children
maintained the gains at the 3-month follow-up assessment. The authors
conclude that W-CBT may be efficacious in the treatment of OCD in youth
and may be a promising tool for future dissemination.
Exposure and response prevention (ERP) was studied in a group format in
youth with OCD in a community-based program. Group-based ERP was
effective in reducing OCD symptom severity and depressive symptoms, but
not anxiety symptoms, in a naturalistic treatment setting for children with
OCD and comorbid anxiety or depressive features.
Multiple randomized clinical trials establish the efficacy of SSRIs for OCD
in youth. A meta-analysis of 13 studies of SSRIs, including sertraline,
fluvoxamine, fluoxetine, and paroxetine, has provided evidence of the
efficacy of SSRIs with a moderate effect size. A randomized controlled
clinical trial of citalopram versus fluoxetine in youth with OCD found that
citalopram was as safe and effective as fluoxetine for the treatment of OCD
in children and adolescents. There have been no apparent differences in the
rate of response for the individual SSRIs.
Currently, three SSRIs: sertraline (at least 6 years), fluoxetine (at least 7
years), and fluvoxamine (at least 8 years), as well as clomipramine (at least
10 years), have received FDA approval for the treatment of OCD in youth.
The black-box warning for antidepressants used in children for any disorder,
including OCD, is applicable so that close monitoring for suicidal ideation or
behavior is mandated when using these agents in children.
Typical side effects that emerge with the use of SSRIs include insomnia,




<<<PAGE 1247>>>

Maintenance

6–24 mo Return to full
or
function and
longer
quality of life
Prevention of
recurrence

Continue
psychoeducation
Rehabilitate
Manage
comorbidities
Monitor for
recurrence

Modified from Lam RW, McIntosh D, Wang J, Enns MW, Kolivakis T, Michalak EE, Sareen J,
Song WY, Kennedy SH, MacQueen GM, Milev RV, Parikh SV, Ravindran AV; CANMAT
Depression Work Group. Canadian Network for Mood and Anxiety Treatments (CANMAT)
2016 clinical guidelines for the management of adults with major depressive disorder: section
1. Disease burden and principles of care. Can J Psychiatry. 2016;61(9):510–523.

Table 7-11
SSRI and SNRI Antidepressant Medications and Their Side
Effect Profiles
Side Effect Frequency
Drug Class

Recommended 10–30%
Dose Range
(mg)

>30%

SSRI
Citalopram

20–40

Nausea, dry mouth, None
sweating

Escitalopram

10–20

Male sexual
dysfunction and
nausea

Fluoxetine

20–60

Nausea, dry mouth, None
somnolence,
nervousness,
anxiety,
insomnia,
tremor, anorexia

Fluvoxamine

100–300

Dry mouth,

None

Nausea




<<<PAGE 1679>>>

possibly by dopaminergic activity and increased production of
norepinephrine.
Venlafaxine and the SSRIs most often have adverse effects because of the
rise in serotonin levels. A lowering of the sex drive and difficulty reaching
orgasm occur in both sexes. Cyproheptadine, an antihistamine with
antiserotonergic effects, and methylphenidate, with adrenergic effects, may
reverse those adverse effects. Trazodone is associated with the rare
occurrence of priapism, the symptom of prolonged erection in the absence of
sexual stimuli. That symptom appears to result from the α1-adrenergic
antagonism of trazodone.
Table 16-12
Some Pharmacologic Agents Implicated in Inhibited Female
Orgasma
Tricyclic antidepressants
Imipramine (Tofranil)
Clomipramine (Anafranil)
Nortriptyline (Aventyl)
Monoamine oxidase inhibitors
Tranylcypromine (Parnate)
Phenelzine (Nardil)
Isocarboxazid (Marplan)
Dopamine receptor antagonists
Thioridazine (Mellaril)
Trifluoperazine (Stelazine)
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
Fluoxetine (Prozac)
Paroxetine (Paxil)
Sertraline (Zoloft)
Fluvoxamine (Luvox)
Citalopram (Celexa)
aThe interrelation between female sexual dysfunction and pharmacologic agents has been

less extensively evaluated than male reactions. Oral contraceptives are reported to decrease




<<<PAGE 1935>>>

that no blood is visible. It carries a boxed warning for postinjection delirium
sedation syndrome (PDSS). Patients are at risk for severe sedation (including
coma) and must be observed for 3 hours after each injection in a registered
facility. In controlled studies, all patients with PDSS recovered, and there
were no deaths reported. It is postulated that PDSS is secondary to increased
levels of olanzapine secondary to accidental rupture of a blood vessel,
causing extreme sedation or delirium. Patients should be managed as
clinically appropriate and, if necessary, monitored in a facility capable of
resuscitation. The injection can be given every 2 or 4 weeks, depending on
the dosing guidelines.
Drug Interactions. Fluvoxamine (Luvox) and cimetidine (Tagamet)
increase, and carbamazepine and phenytoin decrease, serum concentrations of
olanzapine. Ethanol increases olanzapine absorption by more than 25 percent,
leading to increased sedation. Olanzapine has little effect on the metabolism
of other drugs.
Side Effects. Other than clozapine, olanzapine consistently causes a more
significant amount and more frequent weight gain than other atypicals. This
effect is not dose-related and continues over time. Clinical trial data suggest it
peaks after 9 months, after which it may continue to increase more slowly.
Somnolence, dry mouth, dizziness, constipation, dyspepsia, increased
appetite, akathisia, and tremor are associated with olanzapine use. A small
number of patients (2 percent) may need to discontinue the use of the drug
because of transaminase elevation. There is a dose-related risk of EPS. The
manufacturer recommends a “periodic” assessment of blood sugar and
transaminases during treatment with olanzapine. There is an FDA-mandated
warning about an increased risk of stroke among patients with dementia
treated with SDAs, but this risk is small and is outweighed by improved
behavioral control that treatment may produce.
Quetiapine (Seroquel)
Indications. Quetiapine is indicated for the treatment of schizophrenia. It is
also indicated for the acute treatment of manic episodes associated with
bipolar I disorder, both as monotherapy and as an adjunct to lithium or




<<<PAGE 1965>>>

Fluvoxamine

Fluvoxamine inhibits
metabolism of
haloperidol and
clozapine

Increased
concentrations of
haloperidol and
clozapine

Guanethidine

Antipsychotic antagonizes
guanethidine reuptake

Impaired
antihypertensive
effect

Lithium

Unknown

Rare reports of
neurotoxicity

Meperidine

Additive CNS depression

Hypotension and
sedation

Drug Interactions Assessed to Have Minor or Moderate Severity
Amphetamines,
anorexiants

Decreased pharmacologic
effect of amphetamine

Diminished weight
loss effect;
amphetamines
may exacerbate
psychosis

ACEIs

Additive hypotensive crisis

Hypotension,
postural
intolerance

Antacids
containing
aluminum

Insoluble complex formed
in GI tract

Possible reduced
antipsychotic
effect

AD nonspecific

Decreased metabolism of
AD through competitive
inhibition

Increased AD
concentration

Benzodiazepines Increased pharmacologic
effect of the
benzodiazepine

Respiratory
depression,
stupor,
hypotension




<<<PAGE 1967>>>

Phenothiazines, especially thioridazine, may decrease the metabolism of
and cause toxic concentrations of phenytoin. Barbiturates may increase the
metabolism of DRAs.
Tricyclic drugs and SSRIs that inhibit CYP2D6—paroxetine (Paxil),
fluoxetine (Prozac), and fluvoxamine (Luvox)—interact with DRAs,
resulting in increased plasma concentrations of both drugs. The
anticholinergic, sedative, and hypotensive effects of the drugs may also be
cumulative.
Typical antipsychotics may inhibit the hypotensive effects of αmethyldopa (Aldomet). Conversely, typical antipsychotics may have an
additive effect on some hypotensive drugs. Antipsychotic drugs have a
variable effect on the hypotensive effects of clonidine. Propranolol (Inderal)
coadministration increases the blood concentrations of both drugs.
The DRAs potentiate the CNS-depressant effects of the sedatives,
antihistamines, opiates, opioids, and alcohol, particularly in persons with
impaired respiratory status. When these agents are taken with alcohol, the
risk for heatstroke may be increased.
Cigarette smoking may decrease the plasma levels of the typical
antipsychotic drugs. Epinephrine has a paradoxical hypotensive effect in
persons taking typical antipsychotics. These drugs may decrease the blood
concentration of warfarin (Coumadin), resulting in decreased bleeding time.
The phenothiazines, thioridazine, and pimozide should not be coadministered
with other agents that prolong the QT interval. Thioridazine is
contraindicated in patients taking drugs that inhibit the CYP2D6 isoenzyme
or in patients with reduced levels of CYP2D6.
Laboratory Interferences
Chlorpromazine and perphenazine (Trilafon) may cause both false-positive
and false-negative results in immunologic pregnancy tests and falsely
elevated bilirubin (with reagent test strips) and urobilinogen (with Ehrlich
reagent test) values. These drugs are associated with an abnormal shift in the
results of the glucose tolerance test. However, that shift may reflect the
effects of the drugs on the glucose-regulating system. Phenothiazines have
been reported to interfere with the measurement of 17-ketosteroids and 17hydroxycorticosteroids and produce false-positive results in tests for




<<<PAGE 1974>>>

21.2 Antidepressants
SELECTIVE SEROTONIN REUPTAKE INHIBITORS
Fluoxetine (Prozac), the first SSRI marketed in the United States, rapidly
captured the favor of both clinicians and the general public as reports
emerged of dramatic patient responses to treatment of depression. Patients no
longer experienced such side effects as dry mouth, constipation, sedation,
orthostatic hypotension, and tachycardia, typical side effects associated with
the earlier antidepressant drugs—the TCAs and MAOIs. It was also
significantly safer when taken in overdose than any previously available
antidepressant. A significant effect of fluoxetine’s popularity was that it
helped ameliorate the long-standing stigma of depression and its treatment.
Table 21-15
Currently Approved Indications of the Selective Serotonin
Reuptake Inhibitors in the United States for Adult and
Pediatric Populations

Other SSRIs followed fluoxetine. These include sertraline (Zoloft),
paroxetine (Paxil), fluvoxamine (Luvox), citalopram (Celexa), escitalopram
(Lexapro), and vilazodone (Viibryd). These drugs are all equally effective in




<<<PAGE 1975>>>

treating depression. However, some are approved by the U.S. FDA for
multiple indications, such as major depression, OCD, PTSD, PMDD, panic
disorder, and social phobia (social anxiety disorder) (Table 21-15). Note that
fluvoxamine is not FDA approved as an antidepressant, a fact that is due to a
marketing decision. It is considered an antidepressant in other countries.
Although all SSRIs are equally effective, there are meaningful differences
in pharmacodynamics, pharmacokinetics, and side effects, differences that
might affect clinical responses among individual patients. This would explain
why some patients have better clinical responses to a particular SSRI than
another. The SSRIs have proven more problematic in terms of some side
effects than the original clinical trials suggested. Quality-of-life–associated
adverse effects such as nausea, sexual dysfunction, and weight gain
sometimes mitigate the therapeutic benefits of the SSRIs. There can also be
distressing withdrawal symptoms when SSRIs are stopped abruptly. This
withdrawal is especially true with paroxetine but also occurs when other
SSRIs with short half-lives are stopped.
Pharmacologic Actions
Pharmacokinetics. A significant difference among the SSRIs is their
broad range of serum half-lives. Fluoxetine has the most prolonged half-life:
4 to 6 days; its active metabolite has a half-life of 7 to 9 days. The half-life of
sertraline is 26 hours, and its less active metabolite has a half-life of 3 to 5
days. The half-lives of the other three, which do not have metabolites with
significant pharmacologic activity, are 35 hours for citalopram, 27 to 32
hours for escitalopram, 21 hours for paroxetine, and 15 hours for
fluvoxamine. As a rule, the SSRIs are well absorbed after oral administration
and have their peak effects in the range of 3 to 8 hours. Absorption of
sertraline may be slightly enhanced by food.
There are also differences in plasma protein–binding percentages among
the SSRIs, with sertraline, fluoxetine, and paroxetine being the most highly
bound and escitalopram being the least bound.
All SSRIs are metabolized in the liver by the CYP450 enzymes. Because
the SSRIs have such a broad therapeutic index, other drugs rarely produce
problematic increases in SSRI concentrations. The most critical drug–drug
interactions involving the SSRIs occur as a result of the SSRIs inhibiting the




<<<PAGE 1976>>>

metabolism of the coadministered medication. Each of the SSRIs possesses a
potential for slowing or blocking the metabolism of many drugs (Table 2116). Fluvoxamine is the most problematic of the drugs in this respect. It has a
marked effect on several of the CYP enzymes. Examples of clinically
significant interactions include fluvoxamine and theophylline (Slo-Bid, TheoDur) through CYP1A2 interaction, fluvoxamine and clozapine (Clozaril)
through CYP1A2 inhibition; and fluvoxamine with alprazolam (Xanax) or
clonazepam (Klonopin) through CYP3A4 inhibition. Fluoxetine and
paroxetine also possess significant effects on the CYP2D6 isozyme, which
may interfere with the efficacy of opiate analogs, such as codeine and
hydrocodone, by blocking the conversion of these agents to their active form.
Thus, coadministration of fluoxetine and paroxetine with an opiate interferes
with its analgesic effects. Sertraline, citalopram, and escitalopram are least
likely to complicate treatment because of interactions.
The pharmacokinetics of vilazodone (5 to 80 mg) is dose-proportional.
Steady-state plasma levels are achieved in about 3 days. The elimination of
vilazodone is primarily by hepatic metabolism with a terminal half-life of
approximately 25 hours.
Pharmacodynamics. The SSRIs are believed to exert their therapeutic
effects through serotonin reuptake inhibition. They derive their name because
they have little effect on the reuptake of norepinephrine or dopamine. Often,
adequate clinical activity and saturation of the 5-HT transporters are achieved
at starting dosages. As a rule, higher dosages do not increase antidepressant
efficacy but may increase the risk of adverse effects.
Table 21-16
CYP450 Inhibitory Potential of Commonly Prescribed
Antidepressants




<<<PAGE 1981>>>

DEPRESSION IN ELDERLY AND MEDICALLY ILL PERSONS. The SSRIs are safe and

well tolerated when used to treat elderly and medically ill persons. As a class,
they have little or no cardiotoxic, anticholinergic, antihistaminergic, or αadrenergic adverse effects. Paroxetine does have some anticholinergic
activity, which may lead to constipation and worsening of cognition. The
SSRIs can produce subtle cognitive deficits, prolonged bleeding time, and
hyponatremia, all of which may impact the health of this population. The
SSRIs are effective in poststroke depression and dramatically reduce the
symptom of crying.
DEPRESSION IN CHILDREN. The use of SSRI antidepressants in children and

adolescents has been controversial. Few studies have shown clear-cut
benefits from the use of these drugs, and studies show that there may be an
increase in suicidal or aggressive impulses. However, some children and
adolescents do exhibit dramatic responses to these drugs in terms of
depression and anxiety. Fluoxetine has most consistently demonstrated
effectiveness in reducing symptoms of depressive disorder in both children
and adolescents. This fact may be a function of the quality of the clinical
trials involved. Sertraline is effective in treating social anxiety disorder in this
population, especially when combined with cognitive-behavioral therapy.
Given the potential adverse effect of untreated depression and anxiety in a
young population and the uncertainty about many aspects of how children
and adolescents might react to medication, any use of SSRIs should be
undertaken only within the context of comprehensive management of the
patient.
Anxiety Disorders
OBSESSIVE-COMPULSIVE DISORDER. Fluvoxamine, paroxetine, sertraline, and

fluoxetine are indicated for the treatment of OCD in persons older than the
age of 18 years. Fluvoxamine, fluoxetine, and sertraline have also been
approved for the treatment of children with OCD (ages 6 to 17 years). About
50 percent of persons with OCD begin to show symptoms in childhood or
adolescence, and more than half of these respond favorably to medication.
Beneficial responses can be dramatic. Long-term data support the model of




<<<PAGE 1984>>>

modestly beneficial for weight loss. A significant percentage of all persons
who take SSRIs, including fluoxetine, lose weight initially but later may gain
weight. However, all SSRIs may cause initial weight gain.
PREMENSTRUAL DYSPHORIC DISORDER. PMDD is characterized by debilitating

mood and behavioral changes in the week preceding menstruation that
interferes with normal functioning. Sertraline, paroxetine, fluoxetine, and
fluvoxamine have been reported to reduce the symptoms of PMDD.
Controlled trials of fluoxetine and sertraline administered either throughout
the cycle or only during the luteal phase (the 2 weeks between ovulation and
menstruation) showed both schedules to be equally effective.
An additional observation of unclear significance was that fluoxetine was
associated with changing the duration of the menstrual period by more than 4
days, either lengthening or shortening it. The effects of SSRIs on menstrual
cycle length are mostly unknown and may warrant careful monitoring in
women of reproductive age.
Off-Label Uses
The anorgasmic effects of SSRIs make them
useful as a treatment for men with premature ejaculation. The SSRIs permit
intercourse for a significantly more extended period and are reported to
improve sexual satisfaction in couples in which the man has premature
ejaculation. Fluoxetine and sertraline are useful for this purpose.
PREMATURE EJACULATION.

The SSRIs may reduce obsessive-compulsive behavior in
people with paraphilias. The SSRIs diminish the average time per day spent
in unconventional sexual fantasies, urges, and activities. Evidence suggests a
more significant response to sexual obsessions than for paraphilic behavior.
PARAPHILIAS.

Obsessive-compulsive behavior, poor social relatedness, and
aggression are prominent autistic features that may respond to serotonergic
agents such as SSRIs and clomipramine (Anafranil). Sertraline and
fluvoxamine have been shown in controlled and open-label trials to mitigate
aggressiveness, self-injurious behavior, repetitive behaviors, some degree of
language delay, and (rarely) lack of social relatedness in adults with autistic
AUTISM.




<<<PAGE 1991>>>

Sweating. Some patients experience sweating while being treated with
SSRIs. This sweating is independent of the temperature in the environment.
Nocturnal sweating may drench bed sheets and require a change of
nightclothes. Terazosin (Hytrin), 1 or 2 mg/day, is often dramatically
effective in counteracting sweating.
Overdose. The adverse reactions associated with overdose of vilazodone at
doses of 200 to 280 mg, as observed in clinical trials, included serotonin
syndrome, lethargy, restlessness, hallucinations, and disorientation.
Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitor Withdrawal. The abrupt
discontinuance of SSRI use, especially one with a shorter half-life such as
paroxetine or fluvoxamine, has been associated with a withdrawal syndrome
that may include dizziness, weakness, nausea, headache, rebound depression,
anxiety, insomnia, poor concentration, upper respiratory symptoms,
paresthesias, and migraine-like symptoms. It usually does not appear until
after at least 6 weeks of treatment and usually resolves spontaneously in 3
weeks. Persons who experienced transient adverse effects in the first weeks
of taking an SSRI are more likely to experience discontinuation symptoms.
Fluoxetine is the SSRI least likely to be associated with this syndrome
because the half-life of its metabolite is more than 1 week, and it effectively
tapers itself. Fluoxetine has therefore been used in some cases to treat the
discontinuation syndrome caused by the termination of other SSRIs.
Nevertheless, a delayed and attenuated withdrawal syndrome occurs with
fluoxetine as well.
Drug Interactions
The SSRIs do not interfere with most other drugs. A serotonin syndrome
(Table 21-17) can develop with concurrent administration of MAOIs, Ltryptophan, lithium, or other antidepressants that inhibit the reuptake of
serotonin. Fluoxetine, sertraline, and paroxetine can raise plasma
concentrations of TCAs, which can cause clinical toxicity. Several potential
pharmacokinetic interactions have been described based on in vitro analyses
of the CYP enzymes, but clinically relevant interactions are rare. SSRIs that
inhibit CYP2D6 may interfere with the analgesic effects of hydrocodone and
oxycodone. These drugs can also reduce the effectiveness of tamoxifen




<<<PAGE 1993>>>

CYP2D6 enzyme. Cimetidine can increase the concentration of sertraline and
paroxetine, and phenobarbital (Luminal) and phenytoin can decrease the
concentration of paroxetine. Because of the potential for interference with the
CYP2D6 enzyme, the coadministration of paroxetine with other
antidepressants, phenothiazines, and antiarrhythmic drugs should be
undertaken with caution. Paroxetine may increase the anticoagulant effect of
warfarin. Coadministration of paroxetine and tramadol may precipitate
serotonin syndrome in elderly persons.
Fluvoxamine. Among the SSRIs, fluvoxamine appears to present the most
risk for drug–drug interactions. Fluvoxamine is metabolized by the enzyme
CYP3A4, which may be inhibited by ketoconazole (Nizoral). Fluvoxamine
may increase the half-life of alprazolam, triazolam (Halcion), and diazepam,
and it should not be coadministered with these agents. Fluvoxamine may
increase theophylline levels threefold and warfarin levels twofold, with
significant clinical consequences; thus, the serum levels of the latter drugs
should be closely monitored, and the doses adjusted accordingly.
Fluvoxamine raises concentrations and may increase the activity of clozapine,
carbamazepine, methadone (Dolophine, Methadose), propranolol (Inderal),
and diltiazem (Cardizem). Fluvoxamine has no significant interactions with
lorazepam (Ativan) or digoxin (Lanoxin).
Citalopram. Citalopram is not a potent inhibitor of any CYP enzymes.
Concurrent administration of cimetidine increases concentrations of
citalopram by about 40 percent. Citalopram does not significantly affect the
metabolism of, nor is its metabolism significantly affected by, digoxin,
lithium, warfarin, carbamazepine, or imipramine (Tofranil). Citalopram
increases the plasma concentrations of metoprolol (Lopressor) twofold, but
this usually does not affect BP or heart rate. Data on coadministration of
citalopram and potent inhibitors of CYP3A4 or CYP2D6 are not available.
Escitalopram. Escitalopram is a moderate inhibitor of CYP2D6 and has
been shown to raise desipramine (Norpramin) and metoprolol concentrations
significantly.
Vilazodone. Vilazodone dose should be reduced to 20 mg when




<<<PAGE 1995>>>

administered in the morning or in the evening. Administration after eating
may reduce the GI adverse effects. Sertraline oral concentrate (1 mL = 20
mg) has 12 percent alcohol content and must be diluted before use. When
used to treat panic disorder, sertraline should be initiated at 25 mg to reduce
the risk of provoking a panic attack.
Paroxetine. Immediate-release paroxetine is available in scored 20-mg
tablets; in unscored 10-, 30-, and 40-mg tablets; and as an orange-flavored
10-mg/5-mL oral suspension. Paroxetine use for the treatment of depression
is usually initiated at a dosage of 10 or 20 mg a day. An increase in the
dosage should be considered when an adequate response is not seen in 1 to 3
weeks. At that point, the clinician can initiate upward dose titration in 10-mg
increments at weekly intervals to a maximum of 50 mg a day. Persons who
experience GI upset may benefit from taking the drug with food. Paroxetine
can be taken initially as a single daily dose in the evening; higher dosages
may be divided into two doses per day.
A delayed-release formulation of paroxetine, paroxetine CR, is available in
12.5-, 25-, and 37.5-mg tablets. The starting dosages of paroxetine CR are 25
mg/day for depression and 12.5 mg/day for panic disorder.
Paroxetine is the SSRI most likely to produce a discontinuation syndrome,
because plasma concentrations decrease rapidly in the absence of continuous
dosing. Paroxetine use should be tapered gradually to limit the symptoms of
abrupt discontinuation, with dosage reductions every 2 to 3 weeks.
Fluvoxamine. Fluvoxamine is the only SSRI not approved by the FDA as
an antidepressant. It is indicated for OCD. It is available in unscored 25-mg
tablets and scored 50- and 100-mg tablets. The effective daily dosage range is
50 to 300 mg a day. A usual starting dosage is 50 mg once a day at bedtime
for the first week, after which the dosage can be adjusted according to the
adverse effects and clinical response. Dosages above 100 mg a day may be
divided into twice-daily dosing. A temporary dosage reduction or slower
upward titration may be necessary if nausea develops over the first 2 weeks
of therapy. Although fluvoxamine can also be administered as a single
evening dose to minimize its adverse effects, its short half-life may lead to
interdose withdrawal. An extended-release formulation is available in 100and 150-mg dose strengths. All fluvoxamine formulations should be




<<<PAGE 1996>>>

swallowed with food without chewing the tablet. Abrupt discontinuation of
fluvoxamine may cause a discontinuation syndrome owing to its short halflife.
Citalopram. Citalopram is available in 20- and 40-mg scored tablets and as
a liquid (10 mg/5 mL). The usual starting dosage is 20 mg a day for the first
week, after which it usually is increased to 40 mg a day. For elderly persons
or persons with hepatic impairment, 20 mg a day is recommended. Tablets
should be taken once daily in either the morning or the evening with or
without food.
Escitalopram. Escitalopram is available as 10- and 20-mg scored tablets, as
well as an oral solution at a concentration of 5 mg/5 mL. The recommended
dosage of escitalopram is 10 mg/day. In clinical trials, no additional benefit
was noted when 20 mg/day was used.
Vilazodone. Vilazodone is available as 10-, 20-, and 40-mg tablets. The
recommended therapeutic dose of vilazodone is 40 mg once daily. Treatment
should be titrated, starting with an initial dose of 10 mg once daily for 7 days,
followed by 20 mg once daily for an additional 7 days, and then an increase
to 40 mg once daily. Vilazodone should be taken with food. If vilazodone is
taken without food, inadequate drug concentrations may result, and the
drug’s effectiveness may be diminished. Vilazodone is not approved for use
in children. The safety and efficacy of vilazodone in pediatric patients have
not been studied. The patient’s age should not influence the dose, nor does
mild or moderate hepatic impairment. Vilazodone has not been studied in
patients with severe hepatic impairment. No dose adjustment is
recommended in patients with mild, moderate, or severe renal impairment.
Pregnancy and Breastfeeding. Except for paroxetine, the SSRIs are safe
to take during pregnancy when deemed necessary for the treatment of the
mother. There are no controlled human data regarding vilazodone use during
pregnancy, nor are there human data regarding drug concentrations in breast
milk. Transient QTc prolongation has been noted in newborns whose mother
was being treated with an SSRI during pregnancy.




<<<PAGE 2030>>>

advised to avoid driving or using dangerous equipment if sedated by TCAs.
Sympathomimetics. Tricyclic drug use with sympathomimetic drugs may
cause serious cardiovascular effects.
Oral Contraceptives. Birth control pills may decrease TCA plasma
concentrations through the induction of hepatic enzymes.
Other Drug Interactions. Nicotine may reduce TCA concentrations.
Plasma concentrations may also be lowered by ascorbic acid, ammonium
chloride, barbiturates, cigarette smoking, carbamazepine, chloral hydrate,
lithium (Eskalith), and primidone (Mysoline). TCA plasma concentrations
may be increased by concurrent use of acetazolamide (Diamox), sodium
bicarbonate, acetylsalicylic acid, cimetidine, thiazide diuretics, fluoxetine,
paroxetine, and fluvoxamine (Luvox). Plasma concentrations of the TCAs
may rise three- to fourfold when administered concurrently with fluoxetine,
fluvoxamine, and paroxetine.
Laboratory Interferences
The tricyclic compounds are present at low concentrations and are not likely
to interfere with other laboratory assays. They may interfere with the
determination of conventional neuroleptic blood concentrations because of
their structural similarity and the low concentrations of some neuroleptics.
Dosage and Clinical Guidelines
Persons who intend to take TCAs should undergo routine physical and
laboratory examinations, including a CBC, a WBC count with differential,
and serum electrolytes with liver function tests. An ECG should be obtained
for all persons, especially women older than 40 years of age and men older
than 30 years of age. The TCAs are contraindicated in persons with a QTc
greater than 450 milliseconds. The initial dose should be small and should be
raised gradually. Because of the availability of highly effective alternatives to
TCAs, a newer agent should be used if there is any medical condition that
may interact adversely with the TCAs.
Elderly persons and children are more sensitive to TCA adverse effects




<<<PAGE 2091>>>

Cyclosporine
Desipramine
Dicumarol
Doxepin
Doxycycline
Ethosuximide
Felbamate
Fentanyl
Fluphenazine
Haloperidol
Hormonal contraceptives
Imipramine
Lamotrigine
Methadone
Methsuximide
Methylprednisolone
Nimodipine
Pancuronium
Phensuximide
Phenytoin
Primidone
Theophylline
Valproate
Warfarin
Carbamazepine may increase drug
plasma concentrations of
Clomipramine
Phenytoin
Primidone

Fluoxetine
Fluvoxamine
Gemfibrozil
Itraconazole
Ketoconazole
Isoniazida
Itraconazole
Lamotrigine
Loratadine
Macrolides
Nefazodone
Nicotinamide
Propoxyphene
Terfenadine
Troleandomycin
Valproatea
Verapamil
Viloxazine
Drugs that may decrease
carbamazepine plasma
concentrations
Carbamazepine
(autoinduction)
Cisplatin
Doxorubicin HCl
Felbamate
Phenobarbital
Phenytoin
Primidone
Rifampinb
Theophylline
Valproate

aIncreased concentrations of the active 10,11-epoxide.
bDecreased concentrations of carbamazepine and increased concentrations of the 10,11-

epoxide.
Table by Carlos A. Zarate, Jr., M.D. and Mauricio Tohen, M.D.




<<<PAGE 2122>>>

Hyperacusis

Myoclonus

Nausea

Delirium

Difficulty concentrating

Seizures

Drug Interactions
The most common and potentially severe benzodiazepine receptor agonist
interaction is excessive sedation and respiratory depression occurring when
benzodiazepines are administered concomitantly with other CNS depressants,
such as alcohol, barbiturates, tricyclic and tetracyclic drugs, DRAs, opioids,
and antihistamines. Ataxia and dysarthria may be likely to occur when
lithium, antipsychotics, and clonazepam are combined. The combination of
benzodiazepines and clozapine (Clozaril) has been reported to cause delirium
and should be avoided. Cimetidine (Tagamet), disulfiram (Antabuse),
isoniazid, estrogen, and oral contraceptives increase the plasma concentration
of diazepam, chlordiazepoxide, clorazepate, and flurazepam. However,
antacids may reduce the GI absorption of benzodiazepines. The plasma
concentrations of triazolam and alprazolam are increased to potentially toxic
concentrations by nefazodone (Serzone) and fluvoxamine (Luvox).
The manufacturer of nefazodone recommends that the dosage of triazolam
be lowered by 75 percent, and the dosage of alprazolam be lowered by 50
percent, when given concomitantly with nefazodone. Over-the-counter
preparations of the kava plant, advertised as a “natural tranquilizer,” can
potentiate the action of benzodiazepine receptor agonists through synergistic
overactivation of GABA receptors. Carbamazepine can lower the plasma
concentration of alprazolam. Antacids and food may decrease the plasma
concentrations of benzodiazepines, and smoking may increase the
metabolism of benzodiazepines. The benzodiazepines may increase the
plasma concentrations of phenytoin and digoxin (Lanoxin). The SSRIs may
prolong and exacerbate the severity of zolpidem-induced hallucinations.
Deaths have been reported when parental lorazepam is given with parental
olanzapine.
Dosage and Clinical Guidelines




<<<PAGE 2147>>>

Precautions and Adverse Events. Headache is the most common side
effect of ramelteon. Other adverse effects may include somnolence, fatigue,
dizziness, worsening insomnia, depression, nausea, and diarrhea. We should
not use the drug in patients with severe hepatic impairment. It is also not
recommended in patients with severe sleep apnea or severe chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. Prolactin levels may be increased in women.
The drug should be used with caution, if at all, in nursing mothers and
pregnant women.
Ramelteon has been found sometimes to decrease blood cortisol and
testosterone and to increase prolactin. Female patients should be monitored
for the cessation of menses and galactorrhea, decreased libido, and fertility
problems. The safety and effectiveness of ramelteon in children has not been
established.
Drug Interactions. CYP1A2 is the major isozyme involved in the hepatic
metabolism of ramelteon. Accordingly, fluvoxamine (Luvox) and other
CYP1A2 inhibitors may increase the side effects of ramelteon.
Ramelteon should be administered with caution in patients taking CYP1A2
inhibitors, potent CYP3A4 inhibitors such as ketoconazole, and strong
CYP2C inhibitors such as fluconazole (Diflucan). No clinically meaningful
interactions were found when ramelteon was coadministered with
omeprazole, theophylline, dextromethorphan, midazolam, digoxin, and
warfarin.
Dosing and Clinical Guidelines. The usual dose of ramelteon is 8 mg
within 30 minutes of going to bed. It should not be taken with or immediately
after high-fat meals.
Melatonin
Melatonin (N-acetyl-5-methoxytryptamine) is a hormone produced mainly at
night in the pineal gland. Ingested melatonin can reach and bind to
melatonin-binding sites in the brains of mammals and produce somnolence
when used at high doses. Melatonin is available as a dietary supplement and
is not a medication. Few well-controlled clinical trials have been conducted
to determine its effectiveness in treating such conditions as insomnia, jet lag,
and sleep disturbances related to shift work.




<<<PAGE 2172>>>

flashes. The withdrawal symptoms usually resolve after 2 weeks. However, a
protracted methadone abstinence syndrome is possible that may include
restlessness and insomnia.
The withdrawal symptoms associated with buprenorphine are similar to but
less marked than those caused by methadone. In particular, buprenorphine is
sometimes used to ease the transition from methadone to opioid receptor
antagonists or abstinence because of the relatively mild withdrawal reaction
associated with discontinuation of buprenorphine.
Drug–Drug Interactions
Opioid receptor agonists can potentiate the CNS-depressant effects of
alcohol, barbiturates, benzodiazepines, other opioids, low-potency DRAs,
tricyclic and tetracyclic drugs, and MAOIs. Carbamazepine (Tegretol),
phenytoin (Dilantin), barbiturates, rifampin (Rimactane, Rifadin), and heavy
long-term consumption of alcohol may induce hepatic enzymes, which may
lower the plasma concentration of methadone or buprenorphine and thereby
precipitate withdrawal symptoms. In contrast, however, hepatic enzyme
induction may increase the plasma concentration of active levomethadyl
metabolites and cause toxicity.
Acute opioid withdrawal symptoms may be precipitated in persons on
methadone maintenance therapy who take pure opioid receptor antagonists
such as naltrexone, nalmefene (Revex, Selincro), and naloxone (Narcan);
partial agonists such as buprenorphine; or mixed agonist–antagonists such as
pentazocine (Talwin). These symptoms may be mitigated by the use of
clonidine, a benzodiazepine, or both.
Competitive inhibition of methadone or buprenorphine metabolism after
short-term use of alcohol or administration of cimetidine (Tagamet),
erythromycin, ketoconazole (Nizoral), fluoxetine (Prozac), fluvoxamine
(Luvox), loratadine (Claritin), quinidine (Quinidex), and alprazolam (Xanax)
may lead to higher plasma concentrations or a prolonged duration of action of
methadone or buprenorphine. Medications that alkalinize the urine may
reduce methadone excretion.
Methadone maintenance may also increase plasma concentrations of
desipramine (Norpramin, Pertofrane) and fluvoxamine. The use of
methadone may increase zidovudine (Retrovir) concentrations, which


