<<<PAGE 1249>>>

sweating, male
sexual
dysfunction
Desvenlafaxine

50–100

Dry mouth,
dizziness,
nausea,
sweating

None

Duloxetine

30–120

Nausea, dry mouth, None
constipation,
insomnia, male
sexual
dysfunction

Levomilnacipran

20–80

Nausea, dry mouth, None
headaches, male
sexual
dysfunction

Other Second-Generation and Novel Antidepressants
Agomelatinea

25–50

None

None

Bupropion

150–450

Insomnia, dry
mouth, nausea

Headaches

Mirtazapine

15–60

Dry mouth,
constipation,
increased
appetite, weight
gain

Somnolence

Moclobemidea

300–600

None

None

Vilazodone

10–40

Diarrhea, nausea,
headaches

None

Vortioxetine

10–20

Nausea

None

aNot routinely available in the United States.




<<<PAGE 1997>>>

Loss of Efficacy. Some patients report a diminished response or total loss
of response to SSRIs with recurrence of depressive symptoms while
remaining on a full dose of medication. The exact mechanism of this socalled “poop-out” is unknown, but the phenomenon is genuine. Potential
remedies for the attenuation of the response to SSRIs include increasing or
decreasing the dosage, tapering drug use, and then rechallenging with the
same medication, switching to another SSRI or non-SSRI antidepressant, and
augmenting with bupropion or another augmentation agent.
Vortioxetine (Trintellix). Vortioxetine works mainly as an inhibitor of
serotonin (5-HT) reuptake, but it has a more complex pharmacologic profile
than other SSRIs. It also acts as an agonist at 5-HT1A receptors, a partial
agonist at 5-HT1B receptors, and an antagonist at 5-HT3, 5-HT1D, and 5-HT7
receptors. The contribution of each of these activities to the drug’s
antidepressant effect has not been established, but it is the only compound
with this combination of pharmacodynamic actions.
Side effects seen during the trials include, but are not limited to, nausea,
constipation, and vomiting.
The recommended starting dose is 10 mg administered orally once daily
without regard to meals. The dose should then be increased to 20 mg/day, as
tolerated. A dose of 5 mg/day should be considered for patients who do not
tolerate higher doses.
The maximum recommended dose of vortioxetine is 10 mg/day in known
CYP2D6 poor metabolizers. Reduction of the dose of vortioxetine by onehalf is suggested when patients are receiving a CYP2D6 potent inhibitor
(e.g., bupropion, fluoxetine, paroxetine, or quinidine) concomitantly. The
dose should be increased to the original dose of vortioxetine in patients who
stop taking CYP inducers (e.g., rifampin, carbamazepine, or phenytoin). This
adjustment is especially essential when a potent CYP inducer is
coadministered for greater than 14 days. The maximum recommended dose
should not exceed three times the original dose. The dose of vortioxetine
should be reduced to the original level within 14 days when the inducer is
discontinued.
Although vortioxetine can be abruptly discontinued, in placebo-controlled
trials, patients experienced transient adverse reactions such as headache and




<<<PAGE 1998>>>

muscle tension following abrupt discontinuation of vortioxetine 15 or 20
mg/day. It is recommended that the dose be decreased to 10 mg/day for 1
week before full discontinuation of vortioxetine 15 or 20 mg/day.
Vortioxetine is available in 5-, 10-, 15-, and 20-mg tablets.

SELECTIVE SEROTONIN–NOREPINEPHRINE REUPTAKE
INHIBITORS
There are currently four SNRIs approved for use in the United States:
venlafaxine (Effexor and Effexor XR), desvenlafaxine succinate (DVS;
Pristiq), duloxetine (Cymbalta), and levomilnacipran (Fetzima). A fifth
SNRI, milnacipran (Savella), available in other countries as an
antidepressant, has U.S. FDA approval in the United States as a treatment for
fibromyalgia. The term SNRI reflects the belief that the therapeutic effects of
these medications are mediated by concomitant blockade of neuronal
serotonin (5-HT) and norepinephrine uptake transporters. The SNRIs are also
sometimes referred to as dual reuptake inhibitors, a broader functional class
of antidepressant medications that include TCAs such as clomipramine
(Anafranil) and, to a lesser extent, imipramine (Tofranil) and amitriptyline
(Elavil). What distinguishes the SNRIs from TCAs is their relative lack of
affinity for other receptors, especially muscarinic, histaminergic, and the
families of α- and β-adrenergic receptors. This distinction is an important one
because the SNRIs have a more favorable tolerability profile than the older
dual reuptake inhibitors.
Venlafaxine and Desvenlafaxine
Therapeutic Indications. Venlafaxine is approved for the treatment of
four disorders: MDD, GAD, social anxiety disorder, and panic disorder.
MDD is currently the only FDA-approved indication for DVS.
DEPRESSION. The FDA does not recognize any class of antidepressants as

being more effective than any other. This does not mean that differences do
not exist, but no study to date has sufficiently demonstrated such superiority.
It has been argued that direct modulation of serotonin and norepinephrine
may convey more significant antidepressant effects than are exerted by




<<<PAGE 3764>>>

Visual neglect, 49
Visuospatial functions
assessment of, 54, 55f
Visuospatial impairment, 48–49, 49f
Visuospatial orientation, 927
The Vital Balance (Menninger), 1085
VNS. See Vagal nerve stimulation (VNS)
Vocational rehabilitation, 584, 792
Volatile solvent inhalation, 63
Volatile substances. See Inhalants
Vomeronasal organ, 928
von Recklinghausen’s disease. See Neurofibromatosis
Vortioxetine (Trintellix), 632
Waiting room, 4–5
Wakefulness
LC neurons and, 955
quiet, 1003
Weapons use, by youths, 904
Weblogs, 28
Wechsler Intelligence Scales, 52, 54
Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale-Revised (WAIS-R), 90, 935
Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale III (WAIS-III), 52, 53t, 82t
Wechsler Individual Achievement Test (WIAT), 82t
Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children (WISC-III-R), 81, 82t
Wechsler Preschool and Primary Scale of Intelligence—Revised
(WPPSI-R), 82t
Wechsler Memory Scale III (WMS-III), 52, 53t, 54
Weight loss, 21
for obstructive sleep apnea, 514
Weight management, drugs for, 707–710
Wellbutrin. See Bupropion
Wernicke aphasia, 48
Wernicke area, 930, 931
Wernicke encephalopathy, 277, 283
Wernicke, Karl, 931


