<<<PAGE 633>>>

the treatment of anxiety disorders in children and adolescents.
A large, multisite investigation by the NIMH (Research Units in Pediatric
Psychopharmacology [RUPP]) confirmed the safety and efficacy of
fluvoxamine in the treatment of childhood separation anxiety disorder,
generalized anxiety disorder, and social anxiety disorder. This double-blind,
placebo-controlled study of 128 children and adolescents revealed that 76
percent of children in the group treated with fluvoxamine showed significant
improvement compared with 29 percent of those in the placebo group.
Response to medication was noticeable after only 2 weeks of treatment.
Fluvoxamine dosages ranged from 50 to 250 mg/day in children and up to
300 mg/day in adolescents. Children and adolescents with less comorbid
depressive symptoms had the best response. Youths who responded
continued fluvoxamine for 6 months, and almost all of them continued to be
responders at the 6-month mark.
Several other randomized clinical trials have also supported the efficacy of
SSRIs in the treatment of child and adolescent anxiety disorders. A
randomized, controlled trial found fluoxetine, at a dose of 20 mg/day, to be
safe and effective for children with these disorders, with minor side effects
including gastrointestinal distress, headache, and drowsiness. Also, a
randomized clinical trial for the treatment of generalized anxiety disorder in
children lends support for the efficacy of sertraline. Finally, a large industry
randomized clinical trial of paroxetine in the treatment of children with social
anxiety disorder found that paroxetine was associated with a response in 78
percent of children treated. The dose of paroxetine was 10 to 50 mg/day.
The FDA has placed a “black box” warning on antidepressants, including
all of the SSRI agents, used in the treatment of any childhood disorder,
because of concerns about increased suicidality; however, no individual
childhood anxiety study has found a statistically significant increase in
suicidal thoughts or behaviors.
Currently, we do not recommend using tricyclic drugs due to their
potentially serious cardiac adverse effects. Other agents, including buspirone
and β-adrenergic receptor antagonists such as propranolol, have been used
clinically in children with anxiety disorders, but currently, no data support
their efficacy. Diphenhydramine may be used in the short term to control
sleep disturbances in children with anxiety disorders. Open trials and one
double-blind, placebo-controlled study suggested that alprazolam, a




<<<PAGE 1072>>>

Auta J, Kadriu B, Giusti P, Costa E, Guidotti A. Anticonvulsant, anxiolytic,
and non-sedating actions of imidazenil and other imidazo-benzodiazepine
carboxamide derivatives. Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 2010;95(4):383.
Baggish AL, Weiner RB, Kanayama G, Hudson JI, Picard MH, Hutter AM
Jr, Pope HJ Jr. Long-term anabolic-androgenic steroid use is associated
with left ventricular dysfunction. Circ Heart Fail. 2010;3:472.
Baillie AJ, Sannibale C, Stapinski LA, Teesson M, Rapee RM, Haber PS. An
investigator-blinded randomized study to compare the efficacy of
combined CBT for alcohol use disorders and social anxiety disorder versus
CBT focused on alcohol alone in adults with comorbid disorders: The
Combined Alcohol Social Phobia (CASP) trial protocol. BMC Psychiatry.
2013;13:199.
Balster RL, Cruz SL, Howard MO, Dell CA, Cottler LB. Classification of
abused inhalants. Addiction. 2009;104:878.
Baltazar A, Hopkins G, McBride D, Vanderwaal C, Pepper S, Mackey S.
Parental influence on inhalant use. J Child Adolesc Subst Abuse.
2013;22(1):25–37.
Barceloux DG. Amphetamines and phenethylamine derivatives. In: Medical
Toxicology of Drug Abuse: Synthesized Chemicals and Psychoactive
Plants. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons; 2012:3.
Barceloux DG. Barbiturates (amobarbital, butalbital, pentobarbital,
secobarbital). In: Medical Toxicology of Drugs Abuse: Synthesized
Chemicals and Psychoactive Plants. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons
Inc.; 2012:467.
Barnett SR, Riddle MA. Anxiolytics and sedative/hypnotics:
Benzodiazepines, buspirone, and other. In: Martin A, Scahill L, Kratochvil
C, eds. Pediatric Psychopharmacology: Principles and Practice. New
York: Oxford University Press Inc.; 2011:338.
Barry DT, Beitel M, Cutter CJ, Joshi D, Falcioni J, Schottenfeld RS.
Conventional and nonconventional pain treatment utilization among opioid
dependent individuals with pain seeking methadone maintenance
treatment: A needs assessment study. J Addict Med. 2010;4:81.
Basile JR, Binmadi NO, Zhou H, Yang Y-H, Paoli A, Proia P.
Supraphysiological doses of performance enhancing anabolic-androgenic
steroids exert direct toxic effects on neuron-like cells. Front Cell Neurosci.
2013;7:69.




<<<PAGE 1254>>>

to pick a medication in a different class. For example, we might switch from
an SSRI to an SNRI. However, when putting these assumptions to the test, it
is difficult to find any advantage for any particular strategy. For example, in
the landmark STAR*D study, which remains one of the most extensive
studies of treatment strategies following initial failure, although medication
switches were modestly helpful, both switches within and outside a class
were equally effective.
Among augmentation options, several approaches have reasonable
evidence. Several antipsychotics, most notably quetiapine and aripiprazole,
are effective for augmentation. Lithium augmentation is also effective for
augmenting both SSRIs and TCAs. There are also positive studies of thyroid
hormone. However, this strategy is rarely used in clinical practice owing to
the need for ongoing monitoring and potential adverse effects. Several other
agents have been studied, including bupropion, buspirone, lamotrigine,
methylphenidate, and pindolol; however, these have limited placebocontrolled data. One meta-analysis of the available data on switching
strategies concluded that quetiapine and aripiprazole have the best evidence
as augmentation agents. However, we should use these cautiously given their
side effect profile.
NOVEL PHARMACOLOGIC AGENTS

Ketamine. The anesthetic agent ketamine is effective in treatment-resistant
depression. It has a mechanism of action that inhibits the postsynaptic
glutamate-binding protein N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor. Because
abnormalities in glutamatergic signaling seem to have a role in major
depressive disorder, this may account for its efficacy. Until recently,
ketamine was only available intravenously, limiting its use as we had to
monitor patients while they received an infusion of the drug over 30 minutes
in a clinical setting. The most common side effects are dizziness, headache,
and poor coordination, which are transitory. Dissociative symptoms,
including hallucinations, may also occur. A positive response is usually seen
within 24 hours, making this a genuinely novel substance in that it appears to
act much more rapidly than standard antidepressants. However, the effect
seems to be short-lived, and wears off after between 2 and 7 days, again
limiting its use. There are little data on longer-term treatment as well as
concern over associated adverse effects, particularly the psychogenic effect.




<<<PAGE 1304>>>

suggest that they be mostly limited to short-term use, either as an adjunct to
SSRIs during the initial treatment phase or for acute use during exacerbations
of the anxiety. Generally, most guidelines recommend that we should only
consider long-term benzodiazepines for patients who do not respond or
cannot tolerate the SSRIs. The main concerns are the potential for
dependence, as well as the cognitive and other side effects. Tolerance to the
anxiolytic effects does not seem to develop.
Antipsychotics and anticonvulsants are not recommended as initial therapy
but may have some role for treatment-resistant patients. Among them,
quetiapine is popular and may be useful as a second-line treatment for
generalized anxiety disorder.
Buspirone is an azapirone, and effective for the treatment of generalized
anxiety disorders. It is given in three divided doses during the day. The time
to effect is similar to that for antidepressants, several weeks, and may take as
long as several months. It may be useful as an adjunct to antidepressants for
other anxiety disorders; however, most of the evidence is anecdotal.
β-Blockers, such as propranolol, are sometimes used for anxiety disorders,
particularly social anxiety disorder. However, the available evidence does not
support this use. Anecdotally, many consider it useful for social anxiety,
particularly performance anxiety. The presumed mechanism is the drug’s
ability to block many of the physiologic symptoms of anxiety. However,
there is little data to support this, and at least one study showed no effect.
One study concluded it might be useful for performance anxiety—
specifically musical performances—however, it also had significant side
effects that could impair performance.
Antihistamines, such as hydroxyzine, are also used, particularly as
alternatives to benzodiazepines for acute treatment. It has some evidence for
its use in generalized anxiety disorder. We know little about its long-term
effect.
Table 8-6 lists the common classes of drugs used for anxiety disorders and
the evidence supporting their use.
Treatment Approach. Table 8-7 gives some pointers for using
medications to treat patients with anxiety.
For most anxiety disorders, a conservative approach is, to begin with, an
SSRI. Benzodiazepines are most useful when a patient requires rapid control




<<<PAGE 1305>>>

of severe anxiety symptoms. In those cases, a short-term benzodiazepine,
such as lorazepam or alprazolam, is helpful in the short term. Concurrently,
an SSRI should be started and slowly increased.
For panic disorder, SSRIs or the serotonin–norepinephrine reuptake
inhibitor (SNRI) venlafaxine are first-line options. Tricyclic antidepressants
or MAOIs are effective but less preferably given their side effects. Other
agents, such as mirtazapine, are other second-line options. As mentioned, the
benzodiazepines are effective options but mainly used for short-term use or
exacerbations. Long-term antidepressant therapy is useful for preventing
relapse, with studies suggesting that the beneficial effects last for up to 1 to 3
years. When appropriate, maintenance therapy should be discontinued very
slowly.
For generalized anxiety disorder, the approach is similar, with SSRIs and
SNRIs being the first-line treatments. Reasonable alternatives if those are not
effective include agomelatine, pregabalin, buspirone, and quetiapine.
For social anxiety disorder, the approach is similar to those already
described, with SSRIs and SNRIs being the first-line choice. Pregabalin and
clonazepam also have strong evidence, although the same caveats for other
benzodiazepines apply to clonazepam. Phenelzine is effective as well but is
rarely used because of the side effects. Tricyclic antidepressants, buspirone,
and quetiapine are not recommended owing to their side effects. As noted
above, β-blockers may be useful for performance anxiety. However, their use
does not appear to generalize to other types of social anxiety.
Table 8-6
Evidence-Based Recommendations for Monotherapy of
Anxiety Disorders
Anxiety Disorders
Classes and
Agents

GAD

PD

SAD

SSRIs

First line

First line

First line

SNRIs

First line

First line

First line

TCAs

Second line

Second line

Not




<<<PAGE 1358>>>

There is some evidence that, as in the case of OCD, doses higher than those
ordinarily used in the treatment of depression are beneficial in BDD, as are
longer durations. Again, the duration of treatment should be longer, with
gradual tapering of dosage and close monitoring of emergent symptoms.
Patients who do not respond to one SRI may respond to another. There is
anecdotal evidence that buspirone augmentation of SRIs is useful in partial
responders. There is little controlled data on using dopamine receptor
blockers as augmenting agents; what exists is not encouraging. However,
clinicians have reported anecdotal evidence for using aripiprazole as an
augmenting agent. Also, irreversible MAOIs have some positive, although
experiential, reports.
Relation to Plastic Surgery. Few data exist about the number of patients
seeking plastic surgery who have BDD. One study found that only 2 percent
of the patients in a plastic surgery clinic had the diagnosis, but DSM-5
reports the figure to be 7 to 8 percent. The overall percentage may be much
higher, however. Surgical requests are varied: removal of facial sags, jowls,
wrinkles, or puffiness; rhinoplasty; breast reduction or enhancement; and
penile enlargement. Men who request penile enlargements and women who
request cosmetic surgery of the labia of the vagina or the lips of the mouth
may be suffering from this disorder. Commonly associated with the belief
about appearance is an unrealistic expectation of how much surgery will
correct the defect. As reality sets in, the person realizes they have not solved
their problems by merely altering a perceived cosmetic defect. These patients,
hopefully, will explore their feelings of inadequacy using psychotherapy. The
patients may take out their unfulfilled expectations and anger by taking legal
action against their plastic surgeons or becoming depressed.
Hoarding Disorder
HD is challenging to treat. Although it shows similarities to OCD, effective
treatments for OCD have shown little benefit for patients with HD. In one
study, only 18 percent of patients responded to medication and CBT. The
challenges posed by hoarding patients to typical CBT treatment include poor
insight into the behavior and low motivation and resistance to treatment.
The most effective treatment for the disorder is a cognitive-behavioral




<<<PAGE 1558>>>

frustrated and concerned about sleeplessness and its effect on her work.
Her work involves sitting at a microscope for 6 hours out of a 9-hour
working day and meticulously documenting her findings. Her final output
has not suffered, but she must now “double check” for accuracy.
She describes herself as a worrier and a Type-A personality. The
patient does not know how to relax. For example, on vacation she
continually worries about things that can go wrong. She will not even
begin to unwind until she has arrived at the destination, checked in, and
unpacked. Even then, she is unable to relax.
Medical history is unremarkable except for tonsillectomy (age 16
years),
migraine
headaches
(current),
and
diet-controlled
hypercholesterolemia. She takes naproxen as needed for headache. She
does not currently drink caffeinated beverages, smoke tobacco, or drink
alcoholic beverages. She does not use recreational drugs.
The problem with insomnia began after relocation to a new city and
place of employment. She attributes her insomnia to the noisy
neighborhood in which she now lives. She first sought treatment 18
months ago. Her family practice physician diagnosed depression, and she
was started on fluoxetine that made her “climb the walls.” Antihistamines
were tried next with similar results. She was then switched to low-dose
trazodone (for sleep) and developed nausea. After these medical
interventions, she sought medical care elsewhere. Zolpidem 5 mg was
prescribed, but it made her feel drugged and upon discontinuation she had
withdrawal effects. Another family practice physician diagnosed
“nonspecific anxiety disorder” and began buspirone; an experience she
describes as “having an alien try to climb out of my skin.” Buspirone was
discontinued. Paroxetine was tried for 8 weeks with no effect. Finally, a
psychiatrist was consulted, who diagnosed adult attention-deficit disorder
(without hyperactivity) and suggested treatment with methylphenidate. At
this point, the patient was convinced that a stimulant would not help her
insomnia and demanded referral to a sleep disorders center.
DISCUSSION
Ms. W’s symptoms fall into the broad category of an insomnia, and the
symptoms began after having moved from one city to another.
Environmental sleep disorder (noise) and adjustment sleep disorder (new




<<<PAGE 1772>>>

correct diagnosis. With a likelihood of subcortical seizure-like activity,
medications that lower the seizure threshold can aggravate the situation.
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), trazodone, and buspirone are
useful in reducing impulsivity and aggression. Propranolol and other βadrenergic receptor antagonists and calcium channel inhibitors have also been
effective in some cases.
Some neurosurgeons have performed operative treatments for intractable
violence and aggression. No evidence indicates that such treatment is
effective.
Kleptomania
Because true kleptomania is rare, reports of treatment tend to be individual
case descriptions or a short series of cases. Insight-oriented psychotherapy
and psychoanalysis have been successful but depend on patients’
motivations. Those who feel guilt and shame may be helped by insightoriented psychotherapy because of their increased motivation to change their
behavior.
Case reports and case series suggest that cognitive-behavioral therapy may
be helpful. Specific behavior therapies, including systematic desensitization,
aversive conditioning, and a combination of aversive conditioning and altered
social contingencies, have been reported successful, even when motivation
was lacking. SSRIs, such as fluoxetine and fluvoxamine, appear to be
effective in some patients with kleptomania; however, there are also reports
of fluoxetine having no benefit in kleptomania. Case reports indicated
successful treatment with tricyclic drugs, trazodone, lithium, valproate,
topiramate, naltrexone, methylphenidate, and electroconvulsive therapy. In a
controlled trial of antidepressants, escitalopram was found to have no benefit
in treating kleptomania. Though limited by small sample size and open-label
design, high-dose naltrexone was reported to be effective in reducing the urge
to steal in patients with kleptomania.
Pyromania
Little has been written about the treatment of pyromania, and treating
firesetters has been difficult because of their lack of motivation. No single
treatment has been proved effective; as a result, most therapists try various




<<<PAGE 1815>>>

Table 19-12
Pharmacotherapy of
Personality Disorders

Target

Symptom

Domains

of

Choice of Drugs According to Target Symptoms of Personality
Disorders
Target Symptom

Drug/Treatment of
Choice

Not
Recommended

I. Mood Dysregulation and Anxiety
Anxiety
Chronic cognitive

Psychotherapy,
Benzodiazepines
SSRIs, SNRIs,
MAOIs, Low-Dose
Novel
Psychotropics
(aripiprazole,
quetiapine)
Valproate and other
GABA analogs
(clonazepam and
buspirone)

Chronic somatic

MAOIs, SNRIs
(duloxetine,
milnacipran)
Pregabalin and other
GABA analogs,
TCAs, betablockers

Obsessions

SSRIs, Antipsychotics
(quetiapine), TCAs
(clomipramine),
Mild NMDA
antagonists

If used—
benzodiazepines
with long half-life
and short trials
preferred




<<<PAGE 1891>>>

Benzodiazepines
Clonazepam

Klonopin

PO 1 mg bid Akathisia, acute
dystonia

Lorazepam

Ativan

PO 1 mg tid

Buspirone

BuSpar

PO 20–40
mg qid

Tardive dyskinesia

Vitamin E

—

PO 1,200–
1,600
IU/day

Tardive dyskinesia

PO, orally; IM, intramuscularly; IV, intravenously; bid, twice a day; tid, three times a day; qid;
four times a day.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS. The differential diagnosis

includes seizures and

tardive dyskinesia.
COURSE AND PROGNOSIS. Dystonia can fluctuate spontaneously and respond

to reassurance, so the clinician gets the false impression that the movement is
hysterical or entirely under conscious control.
Table 21-4
Treatment of Neuroleptic Malignant Syndrome
Intervention

Dosing

Effectiveness

Amantadine

200–400 mg PO/day in
divided doses

Beneficial as
monotherapy or
in combination;
decrease in
death rate

Bromocriptine

2.5 mg PO bid or tid, may
increase to a total of 45
mg/day

Mortality reduced
as a single or
combined agent

Levodopa/carbidopa Levodopa 50–100 mg/day

Case reports of




<<<PAGE 2039>>>

dilated pupils, and hyperactive deep tendon reflexes. Involuntary movements
may be present, particularly in the face and the jaw. Acidification of the urine
markedly hastens the excretion of MAOIs, and dialysis can be of some use.
Phentolamine or chlorpromazine may be useful if hypertension is a problem.
Moclobemide alone in overdosage causes relatively mild and reversible
symptoms.
Drug Interactions
The significant drug–drug interactions involving MAOIs are listed in Table
21-23. Most antidepressants, as well as precursor agents, should be avoided.
Persons should be instructed to tell any other physicians or dentists who are
treating them that they are taking an MAOI. MAOIs may potentiate the
action of CNS depressants, including alcohol and barbiturates. MAOIs should
not be coadministered with serotonergic drugs, such as SSRIs and
clomipramine (Anafranil), because this combination can trigger serotonin
syndrome. The use of lithium or tryptophan with an irreversible MAOI may
also induce serotonin syndrome. Initial symptoms of serotonin syndrome can
include tremor, hypertonicity, myoclonus, and autonomic signs, which can
then progress to hallucinosis, hyperthermia, and even death. Fatal reactions
had occurred when MAOIs were combined with meperidine (Demerol) or
fentanyl (Sublimaze).
Table 21-23
Drugs to Be Avoided during Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitor
Treatment (Partial Listing)
Never Use
Antiasthmatics
Antihypertensives (methyldopa, guanethidine, reserpine)
Buspirone
Levodopa
Opioids (especially meperidine, dextromethorphan,
propoxyphene, tramadol; morphine or codeine may be less
dangerous)
Cold, allergy, or sinus medications containing dextromethorphan




<<<PAGE 2123>>>

The clinical decision to treat an anxious person with a benzodiazepine should
be carefully considered. Medical causes of anxiety (e.g., thyroid dysfunction,
caffeinism, and prescription medications) should be ruled out.
Benzodiazepine use should be started at a low dosage, and the person should
be instructed regarding the drug’s sedative properties and abuse potential. An
estimated length of therapy should be decided at the beginning of therapy,
and the need for continued therapy should be reevaluated at least monthly
because of the problems associated with long-term use. However, certain
persons with anxiety disorders are unresponsive to treatments other than
benzodiazepines in long-term use.
Benzodiazepines are available in a wide range of formulations.
Clonazepam is available in a wafer formulation that facilitates its use in
patients who have trouble swallowing pills. Alprazolam is available in an
extended-release form, which reduces the frequency of dosing. Some
benzodiazepines are more potent than others in that one compound requires a
relatively smaller dosage than another compound to achieve the same effect.
For example, clonazepam requires 0.25 mg to achieve the same effect as 5
mg of diazepam; thus, clonazepam is considered a high-potency
benzodiazepine. Conversely, oxazepam has an approximate dosage
equivalence of 15 mg and is a low-potency drug.
Table 21-43 lists preparations and doses of medications discussed in this
chapter.

BUSPIRONE
Buspirone hydrochloride (BuSpar) is classified as an azapirone and is
chemically distinct from other psychotropic agents. It acts on two types of
receptors, serotonin (5-HT) and dopamine (D). It has a high affinity for the 5HT1A serotonin receptor, acting as an agonist or partial agonist, and moderate
affinity for the D2 dopamine receptor, acting as both an agonist and an
antagonist. The approved indication for this psychotropic drug is for the
treatment of GAD. It was initially believed to be a better alternative to the
benzodiazepine drug group because buspirone does not possess
anticonvulsant and muscle relaxant effects. Reports continue to appear that
some patients benefit from the addition of buspirone to their antidepressant
regimen. Its use in this role is more common than its use as an anxiolytic.




<<<PAGE 2124>>>

Interestingly, the antidepressant drug vilazodone (Viibryd) inhibits 5-HT
reuptake and acts as a 5-HT1A receptor partial agonist.
Pharmacologic Actions
Buspirone is well absorbed from the GI tract, but absorption is delayed by
food ingestion. Peak plasma levels are achieved 40 to 90 minutes after oral
administration. At doses of 10 to 40 mg, single-dose linear pharmacokinetics
are observed. Nonlinear pharmacokinetics are observed after multiple doses.
Because of its short half-life (2 to 11 hours), buspirone is dosed three times
daily. An active metabolite of buspirone, 1-pyrimidinylpiperazine (1-PP), is
about 20 percent less potent than buspirone but is up to 30 percent more
concentrated in the brain than the parent compound. The elimination half-life
of 1-PP is 6 hours.
Buspirone does not affect the GABA-associated chloride ion channel or
the serotonin reuptake transporter, targets of other drugs that are effective in
GAD. Buspirone also has activity at 5-HT2 and dopamine type 2 (D2)
receptors, although the significance of the effects at these receptors is
unknown. At D2 receptors, it has properties of both an agonist and an
antagonist.
Therapeutic Indications
Generalized Anxiety Disorder. Buspirone is a narrow-spectrum
antianxiety agent with demonstrated efficacy only in the treatment of GAD.
In contrast to the SSRIs or venlafaxine, buspirone is not effective in the
treatment of panic disorder, OCD, or social phobia. Buspirone, however, has
an advantage over these agents in that it does not typically cause sexual
dysfunction or weight gain.
Some evidence suggests that, compared with benzodiazepines, buspirone is
generally more useful for symptoms of anger and hostility, equally effective
for psychic symptoms of anxiety, and less effective for somatic symptoms of
anxiety. The full benefit of buspirone is evident only at dosages above 30 mg
a day. Compared with the benzodiazepines, buspirone has a delayed onset of
action and lacks any euphoric effect. Unlike benzodiazepines, buspirone has
no immediate effects, and patients should be told that a full clinical response




<<<PAGE 2125>>>

may take 2 to 4 weeks. If an immediate response is needed, patients can be
started on a benzodiazepine and then withdrawn from the drug after
buspirone’s effects begin. Sometimes the sedative effects of benzodiazepines,
which are not found with buspirone, are desirable; however, these sedative
effects may cause impaired motor performance and cognitive deficits.
Other Disorders. Many other clinical uses of buspirone have been
reported, but most have not been confirmed in controlled trials. Evidence of
the efficacy of high-dosage buspirone (30 to 90 mg a day) for depressive
disorders is mixed. Buspirone appears to have weak antidepressant activity,
which has led to its use as an augmenting agent in patients who have failed
standard antidepressant therapy. In a large study, buspirone augmentation of
SSRIs worked as well as other commonly used strategies. Buspirone is
sometimes used to augment SSRIs in the treatment of OCD. There are reports
that buspirone may be beneficial against the increased arousal and flashbacks
associated with PTSD.
Because buspirone does not act on the GABA–chloride ion channel
complex, the drug is not recommended for the treatment of withdrawal from
benzodiazepines, alcohol, or sedative-hypnotic drugs, except as treatment of
comorbid anxiety symptoms.
Scattered trials suggest that buspirone reduces aggression and anxiety in
persons with organic brain disease or traumatic brain injury. It is also used
for SSRI-induced bruxism and sexual dysfunction, nicotine craving, and
ADHD.
Precautions and Adverse Reactions
Buspirone does not cause weight gain, sexual dysfunction, discontinuation
symptoms, or significant sleep disturbance. It does not produce sedation or
cognitive and psychomotor impairment. The most common adverse effects of
buspirone are headache, nausea, dizziness, and (rarely) insomnia. No sedation
is associated with buspirone. Some persons may report a minor feeling of
restlessness, although that symptom may reflect an incompletely treated
anxiety disorder. No deaths have been reported from overdoses of buspirone,
and the median lethal dose is estimated to be 160 to 550 times the
recommended daily dose. Buspirone should be used with caution by persons




<<<PAGE 2126>>>

with hepatic and renal impairment, pregnant women, and nursing mothers.
Buspirone can be used safely by the elderly.
Drug Interactions
The coadministration of buspirone and haloperidol (Haldol) results in
increased blood concentrations of haloperidol. Buspirone should not be used
with MAOIs to avoid hypertensive episodes, and a 2-week washout period
should pass between the discontinuation of MAOI use and the initiation of
treatment with buspirone. Drugs or foods that inhibit CYP3A4, for example,
erythromycin, itraconazole (Sporanox), nefazodone (Serzone), and grapefruit
juice, increase buspirone plasma concentrations.
Laboratory Interferences
Single doses of buspirone can cause transient elevations in growth hormone,
prolactin, and cortisol concentrations, although the effects are not clinically
significant.
Dosage and Clinical Guidelines
Buspirone is available in single-scored 5- and 10-mg tablets and triple-scored
15- and 30-mg tablets; treatment is usually initiated with either 5 mg orally
three times daily or 7.5 mg orally twice daily. The dosage can be raised 5 mg
every 2 to 4 days to the usual dosage range of 15 to 60 mg a day.
Buspirone should not be used in patients with past hypersensitivity to
buspirone, in cases of diabetes-associated metabolic acidosis, or patients with
severely compromised liver or renal function.
Switching from a Benzodiazepine to Buspirone. Buspirone is not
cross-tolerant with benzodiazepines, barbiturates, or alcohol. A common
clinical problem, therefore, is how to initiate buspirone therapy in a person
who is currently taking benzodiazepines. There are two alternatives. First, the
clinician can start buspirone treatment gradually while the benzodiazepine is
being withdrawn. Second, the clinician can start buspirone treatment and
bring the person up to a therapeutic dosage for 2 to 3 weeks while the person
is still receiving the regular dosage of the benzodiazepine and then slowly
taper the benzodiazepine dosage. Patients who have received




<<<PAGE 2127>>>

benzodiazepines in the past, especially in recent months, may find that
buspirone is not as effective as the benzodiazepines in the treatment of their
anxiety. This difference might be explained by the absence of the immediate
mildly euphoric and sedative effects of benzodiazepines. The
coadministration of buspirone and benzodiazepines may be useful in the
treatment of persons with anxiety disorders who have not responded to
treatment with either drug alone.

β-ADRENERGIC RECEPTOR ANTAGONISTS
Because of the innervations of many, if not most, peripheral organs and
vasculature by the sympathetic division of the autonomic nervous system,
their functions are ultimately controlled, in part, by one of the two major
classes of adrenergic receptors: α-receptors (see Table 33-2) and β-receptors.
These receptors are further subdivided based on their action and location, and
they are located both peripherally and in the CNS. Shortly after being
introduced for cardiac indications, propranolol (Inderal) was reported to be
useful for agitation, and its use in psychiatry spread rapidly. The five most
commonly used β-receptor antagonists in psychiatry are propranolol, nadolol
(Corgard), metoprolol (Lopressor, Toprol), pindolol (Visken), and atenolol
(Tenormin) (Table 21-45).
Pharmacologic Actions
The β-receptor antagonists differ concerning lipophilicities, metabolic routes,
β-receptor selectivity, and half-lives. The absorption of the β-receptor
antagonists from the GI tract is variable. The agents that are most soluble in
lipids (i.e., are lipophilic) are likely to cross the blood–brain barrier and enter
the brain; those agents that are least lipophilic are less likely to enter the
brain. When CNS effects are desired, a lipophilic drug may be preferred;
when only peripheral effects are desired, a less lipophilic drug may be
indicated.
Table 21-45
β-Adrenergic Drugs Used in Psychiatry




<<<PAGE 2216>>>

Cyproheptadine

Periactin

4–6

Table 21-59
Other Histamine Antagonists often Prescribed
Class

Generic
Name

Trade
Name

Second-generation histamine 1 receptor
antagonists

Cetirizine

Zyrtec

Loratadine

Claritin

Fexofenadine Allegra
Histamine 2 receptor antagonists

Nizatidine

Axid

Famotidine

Pepcid

Ranitidine

Zantac

Cimetidine

Tagamet

Activation of H1 receptors stimulates wakefulness; therefore, receptor
antagonism causes sedation. All four agents also possess some antimuscarinic
cholinergic activity. Cyproheptadine is unique among the drugs because it
has both potent antihistamine and serotonin 5-HT2-receptor antagonist
properties.
Therapeutic Indications
Antihistamines are useful as a treatment for neuroleptic-induced
parkinsonism, neuroleptic-induced acute dystonia, and neuroleptic-induced
akathisia. They are an alternative to anticholinergics and amantadine for these
purposes. The antihistamines are relatively safe hypnotics, but they are not
superior to the benzodiazepines, which have been much better studied in
terms of efficacy and safety. The antihistamines have not been proven
effective for long-term anxiolytic therapy; therefore, the benzodiazepines,
buspirone (BuSpar), or SSRIs are preferable for such treatment.
Cyproheptadine is sometimes used to treat impaired orgasms, especially




<<<PAGE 2276>>>

of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Vol. 2. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins; 2009:3044.
Faber J, Sansone RA. Buspirone: a possible cause of alopecia. Innov Clin
Neurosci. 2013;10(1):12–13.
Flomenbaum NE, Goldfrank LR, Hoffman RS, Howland MA, Lewin NA.
Goldfrank’s Toxicologic Emergencies. 8th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill;
2006.
Hutto B, Fairchild A, Bright R. γ-Hydroxybutyrate withdrawal and chloral
hydrate. Am J Psychiatry. 2000;157:1706.
Jovaisas B; and Canadian Pharmacists Association. CPS 2020: Compendium
of Pharmaceuticals and Specialities: Canada’s Trusted Drug Reference.
Canadian Pharmacists Association, 2020.
Kaplan GB, Greenblatt DJ, Ehrenberg BL, Goddard JE, Harmatz JS.
Differences in pharmacodynamics but not pharmacokinetics between
subjects with panic disorder and healthy subjects after treatment with a
single dose of alprazolam. J Clin Psychopharmacol. 2000;20:338–346.
Katsura M. Functional involvement of cerebral diazepam binding inhibitor
(DBI) in the establishment of drug dependence. Nippon Yakurigaku Zasshi.
2001;117:
159–168.
Koerner IK, Brambrink AM. Brain protection by anesthetic agents. Curr
Opin Anaesthesiol. 2006;19:481.
Korpi ER, Matilla MJ, Wisden W, Luddens H. GABA(A)-receptor subtypes:
clinical efficacy and selectivity of benzodiazepine site ligands. Ann Med.
1997;29:275–282.
Le Foll B, Boileau I. Repurposing buspirone for drug addiction treatment. Int
J Neuropsychopharmacol. 2013;16(2):251–253.
Levitt AJ, Schaffer A, Lanctôt KL. Buspirone. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA,
Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry.
9th ed. Vol. 2. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins:
2009:3060.
McAinsh J, Cruickshank JM. Beta-blockers and central nervous system side
effects. Pharmacol Ther. 1990;46(2):163–197.
McCarron MM, Schulze BW, Walberg CB, Thompson GA, Ansari A. Short
acting barbiturate overdosage: correlation of intoxication score with serum
barbiturate concentration. JAMA. 1982;248:55.




<<<PAGE 2277>>>

McIntyre RS. β-Adrenergic receptor antagonists. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA,
Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry.
9th ed. Vol. 2. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins;
2009:3009.
Myers RA, Plym MJ, Signor LJ, Lodge NJ. 1-(2-pyrimidinyl)-piperazine, a
buspirone metabolite, modulates bladder function in the anesthetized rat.
Neurourol Urodyn. 2004;23(7):709–115.
Navines R, Martin-Santos R, Gomez-Gil E, Martinez De Osaba MJ, Gasto C.
Interaction between serotonin 5-Htla receptors and beta-endorphins
modulates antidepressant response. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol
Psychiatry. 2008;32:1804–1809.
Peskind ER, Tsuang DW, Bonner LT, Pascualy M, Riekse RG. Propranolol
for disruptive behaviors in nursing home residents with probable or
possible Alzheimer disease: a placebo-controlled study. Alzheimer Dis
Assoc Disord. 2005;19(1):23–28.
Rosa MA, Rosa MO, Marcolin MA, Fregni F. Cardiovascular effects of
anesthesia in ECT: a randomized, double-blind comparison of etomidate,
propofol and thiopental. J ECT. 2007;23:6–8.
Sempere T, Urbina M, Lima L. 5-HT1A and beta-adrenergic receptors
regulate proliferation of rat blood lymphocytes. Neuroimmunomodulation.
2004;11(5):307.
Silberstein SD, McCrory DC. Butalbital in the treatment of headache: history,
pharmacology, and efficacy. Headache. 2001;41:953–967.
Smith MC, Riskin BJ. The clinical use of barbiturates in neurological
disorders. Drugs. 1991;42:365–378.
Syvalahti E, Penttila J, Majasuo H, Palvimaki EP, Laakso A. Combined
treatment with citalopram and buspirone: effects on serotonin 5-HT2A and
5-HT2C receptors in the rat brain. Pharmacopsychiatry. 2006;39(1):1–8.
Van Oudenhove L, Kindt S, Vos R, Coulie B, Tack J. Influence of buspirone
on gastric sensorimotor function in man. Aliment Pharmacol Ther.
2008;28:1326–1333.
Wheeler DS, Jensen RA, Poss WB. A randomized, blinded comparison of
chloral hydrate and midazolam sedation in children undergoing
echocardiography. Clin Pediatr. 2001;40:381–387.
Wong H, Dockens RC, Pajor L, Yeola S, Grace JE Jr. 6-Hydroxybuspirone is




<<<PAGE 2278>>>

a major active metabolite of buspirone: assessment of pharmacokinetics
and 5-hydroxytryptamine 1A receptor occupancy in rats. Drug Metab
Dispos. 2007;35(8):1387–1392.
Drugs Used to Treat Sleep Disorders
Bannan N, Rooney S, O’Connor J. Zopiclone misuse: an update from Dublin.
Drug Alcohol Rev. 2007;26:83–85.
Boehlein JK, Kinzie JD. Pharmacologic reduction of CNS noradrenergic
activity in PTSD: the case for clonidine and prazosin. J Psychiatr Pract.
2007;13:72–78.
Calvo JR, Gonzalez-Yanes C, Maldonado M. The role of melatonin in the
cells of the innate immunity: a review. J Pineal Res. 2013;55(2):103–120.
DeMicco M, Wang-Weigand S, Zhang J. Long-term therapeutic effects of
ramelteon treatment in adults with chronic insomnia: a 1-year study. Sleep.
2006;
29(Suppl):A234.
Doghramji K. Melatonin and its receptors: a new class of sleep-promoting
agents. J Clin Sleep Med. 2007;3(5 Suppl):S17.
Erman M, Seiden D, Zammit G, Sainati S, Zhang J. An efficacy, safety, and
dose-response study of ramelteon in patients with chronic primary
insomnia. Sleep Med. 2006;7(1):17–24.
Johnson MW, Suess PE, Griffiths RR. Ramelteon: a novel hypnotic lacking
abuse liability and sedative adverse effects. Arch Gen Psychiatry.
2006;63(10):
1149–1157.
Karim A, Bradford D, Siebert F, Zhao Z. Pharmacokinetic effect of multiple
oral doses of donepezil on ramelteon, and vice versa, in healthy adults.
Sleep. 2007;
30(Suppl):A244.
Kato K, Hirai K, Nishiyama K, Uchikawa O, Fukatsu K. Neurochemical
properties of ramelteon (TAK-375), a selective MT1/MT2 receptor agonist.
Neuropharmacology. 2005;48(2):301–310.
Lemmer B. The sleep–wake cycle and sleeping pills. Physiol Behav.
2009;90:285.
Lieberman JA. Update on the safety considerations in the management of
insomnia with hypnotics: incorporating modified-release formulations into




<<<PAGE 3615>>>

Bruininks-Oseretsky Test of Motor Development, 151
Bruxism, sleep, 501–502, 515
Bulimia nervosa, 628
clinical features, 469
comorbidity, 475
course and prognosis, 476
diagnosis and clinical features, 471–473, 472t
differential diagnosis, 474
epidemiology, 478
etiology, 479
developmental factors, 479
environmental and social factors, 480
genetic and biologic factors, 479
psychological factors, 479–480
pathology and laboratory examination, 473–474
treatment, 477–478
Bulimia Test-Revised (BULIT-R), 44–45
Bullying, 903–904
cyber, 333, 904
physical, 903
social, 903
verbal, 903
Buprenorphine, 293, 689
for opioid withdrawal, 295
Bupropion, 600, 607, 732
for ADHD, 137
associated euphoric feeling, 636
in bulimia nervosa treatment, 478
dosage and clinical guidelines, 636–637
drug interactions, 636
laboratory interferences, 636
pharmacologic actions, 635
precautions and adverse reactions, 636
for smoking cessation, 310, 310t
therapeutic indications, 635–636
BuSpar. See Buspirone
Buspirone, 672–673


