<<<PAGE 552>>>

controlled study of sertraline to prevent PTSD found that children who
received sertraline, flexibly dosed between 25 and 150 mg/day, had a
decrease in parent-reported symptoms of PTSD over 8 weeks compared to a
placebo group. Among the child-reported symptoms, however, there was no
significant difference between the two groups.
Psychiatrists sometimes use antiadrenergic agents to treat dysregulation of
the noradrenergic system in adults and youth with PTSD. α2-Agonists such as
clonidine and guanfacine, for example, have been used to decrease
norepinephrine release, whereas centrally acting β-antagonists such as
propranolol, and α1-antagonists such as prazosin, are hypothesized to
improve hyperarousal and intrusive thoughts through attenuation of
norepinephrine postsynaptically. Although there are some data in adults with
PTSD to support the use of these agents, there are mainly case reports for
youths. There is a suggestion that guanfacine may reduce nightmares in
children with PTSD and that clonidine may diminish symptoms of
reenactment of traumatic events in children. One report of propranolol
treatment in 11 pediatric patients with PTSD from sexual or physical abuse
with a mean age of 8.5 years, who exhibited agitation and hyperarousal,
indicated some decrease in symptoms in 8 of the 11 children studied. Another
open study of transdermal clonidine treatment of preschoolers with PTSD
suggests that clonidine may be efficacious in this population in decreasing
activation and hyperarousal. An additional open trial of oral clonidine with
dosage ranges of 0.05 to 0.1 mg twice daily similarly suggests that this
medication may provide some relief for the symptoms of hyperarousal,
impulsivity, and agitation in young children with PTSD.
Second-generation antipsychotics such as risperidone, olanzapine,
quetiapine, ziprasidone, and aripiprazole have been studied in adults with
PTSD with mixed results. Risperidone and aripiprazole both have FDA
approval for use in children and adolescents with aggression, severe
behavioral dyscontrol, and severe psychiatric disorders; however, there are no
controlled trials with children with PTSD. For example, there is one case
series of three preschool-age children who exhibited symptoms of acute
stress disorder and who had severe thermal burns improved after being
treated with risperidone.
In children and adolescents with PTSD, there is one open-label trial of




<<<PAGE 1390>>>

stating he could not go on alone. (Courtesy of J. W. Katzman, M.D., and
C. M. A. Geppert, M.D., Ph.D., M.P.H.)

TREATMENT APPROACH
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder
We list some of the most common treatments for PTSD and related disorders
in Table 10-7.
Pharmacotherapy. Currently, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
(SSRIs), particularly sertraline and paroxetine, have the most robust evidence
for efficacy. There are promising initial findings for the noradrenergic and
serotonergic reuptake inhibitor venlafaxine, the atypical antipsychotic
risperidone, and the anticonvulsant topiramate. We lack evidence for the
effectiveness of benzodiazepines, despite their continued use in practice; one
meta-analysis went so far as to consider benzodiazepines relatively
contraindicated in this population. Finally, the alpha 1-adrenergic antagonist
prazosin and the atypical antipsychotics show some efficacy in treatmentresistant PTSD, and prazosin shows effectiveness for treating nightmares.
Insomnia is prevalent and disabling in chronic PTSD, with low-dose
trazodone preferable to benzodiazepines. The orexin antagonist suvorexant is
promising for managing trauma-related insomnia.
Table 10-7
Treatments for PTSD
Pharmacologic
interventions

Strong evidence
SSRIs (sertraline, paroxetine)
Promising initial evidence
SNRI (venlafaxine)
Atypical antipsychotic (risperidone)
Anticonvulsant (topiramate)
Limited evidence
Alpha 1-adrenergic antagonist (prazosin)




<<<PAGE 1391>>>

Lack of evidence
Benzodiazepines
Symptom-specific
Prazosin (nightmares)
Orexin (insomnia)
Trazodone (insomnia)
Psychotherapeutic
interventions

Trauma-focused cognitive-behavioral therapy
(TFCBT),
Prolonged exposure (PE) therapy
Cognitive processing therapy (CPT)
Eye movement desensitization and
reprocessing therapy (EMDR)
Present centered therapy (PCT)
Cognitive processing therapy (CPT)
Psychodynamic psychotherapy
Group and family therapy

Psychotherapy. Several therapies are effective for PTSD and related
disorders; we list these in Table 10-7. Trauma-focused cognitive-behavioral
therapy (TFCBT) includes prolonged exposure (PE) therapy, which focuses
on reexperiencing the traumatic event through repeatedly engaging with the
memories (imaginal exposure) and everyday reminders (in vivo exposure)
rather than avoiding triggers. Eye movement desensitization and reprocessing
therapy (EMDR) involves repeatedly recalling distressing images while
receiving sensory inputs. Present centered therapy (PCT) focuses on the
current relationship and work challenges rather than the trauma, and
cognitive processing therapy (CPT) emphasizes correcting faulty attributions
including posttraumatic overgeneralizations of the world as dangerous,
uncontrollable, and unpredictable. Psychodynamic psychotherapy may also
be useful in the treatment of many patients with PTSD. In some cases,
reconstruction of the traumatic events with associated abreaction and
catharsis may be therapeutic. Still, psychotherapy must be tailored to the
individual, because reexperiencing the trauma overwhelms some patients.
In addition to individual therapy techniques, group therapy and family




<<<PAGE 1434>>>

medication response is likely to be partial, devising the best “shock-absorber”
system for the patient at a given time. In general, success is more likely if the
target symptoms are present across most or all personality states, rather than
confined to one or a few. Because rapid symptom oscillations are
characteristic in this population, it is not advisable to chase each symptom
shift with a medication change.
The most robust medication treatment effect in this patient population is
the response of nightmares to the α1-adrenergic antagonist prazosin. If the
patient tolerates the blood pressure effects, dosages of prazosin as high as 25
mg daily, in single or twice-daily doses, can be useful. Daytime dosing may
also be effective for control of flashbacks and intrusive symptoms.
Doxazosin, a longer-acting α1-adrenergic antagonist, may also help with
nightmares and intrusive symptoms in PTSD.
Antidepressant medications can reduce depression and stabilize mood. A
variety of PTSD symptoms, especially intrusive and hyperarousal symptoms,
are partially medication responsive. Clinicians report some success with
SSRI, tricyclic, and monoamine oxidase (MAO) antidepressants, β-blockers,
clonidine, anticonvulsants, and benzodiazepines in reducing intrusive
symptoms, hyperarousal, and anxiety in patients with a dissociative identity
disorder. Patients with obsessive-compulsive symptoms may respond to
serotonergic antidepressants. Emerging data suggest that naltrexone may help
ameliorate recurrent self-injurious behaviors in a subset of traumatized
patients.
The atypical neuroleptics, such as risperidone, quetiapine, ziprasidone,
aripiprazole, and olanzapine, may be more effective and better tolerated than
typical neuroleptics for overwhelming anxiety and intrusive PTSD symptoms
in patients with dissociative identity disorder. However, weight gain and
metabolic syndrome may be a particularly problematic side effect for these
nonpsychotic patients. Occasionally, an extremely disorganized,
overwhelmed, chronically ill patient with dissociative identity disorder, who
has not responded to trials of other neuroleptics, responds favorably to a trial
of clozapine.
Electroconvulsive Therapy. For some patients, ECT helps to ameliorate
refractory mood disorders and does not worsen dissociative memory




<<<PAGE 1637>>>

melatonin levels begin to rise at dusk and remain elevated until dawn. Bright
light suppresses the release of melatonin. Melatonin, in a sense, is the signal
of darkness in the brain. As such, we can use it clinically to manage sighted
patients with disturbed sleep–wake cycles. Melatonin is available over the
counter in the United States. A prescription synthetic melatonin agonist
(ramelteon) is also available. Ramelteon is FDA approved for treating
patients with sleep-onset insomnia but is used off label for the entire
spectrum of circadian rhythm sleep disorders. Outside the United States, a
sustained-release prescription form of melatonin is available. Of interest, the
only medication approved for shift work sleep disorder is the wakepromoting compound modafinil. Modafinil treats sleepiness occurring during
night shift work.
Chronotherapy. Chronotherapy is one technique used to reset the biologic
clock. It involves progressively phase delaying a person until synchronizing
the circadian oscillator with the desired sleep–wake schedule. Most young
and middle-aged adults have a propensity to phase delay the circadian sleep–
wake rhythm progressively anyhow. Thus, phase delaying each night by 2 to
3 hours is simpler than phase advancing because it capitalizes on a natural
tendency. Halting the phase delay at the appropriate moment and maintaining
the desired synchrony can be a challenge. The patient also has to cope with
an odd sleep–wake schedule for the better part of a week during therapy
(which can interfere with school or work). For these reasons, the
development of light therapy and pharmacologic interventions has
overshadowed chronotherapy.
Parasomnias and Sleep-Related Movement Disorders
Nightmare Disorder. Treatment using behavioral techniques can be
helpful. Desensitization and exposure therapy, image rehearsal therapy, lucid
dream therapy, and cognitive therapy can help address nightmare disorder.
Additionally, evidence for the use of prazosin, a CNS α-1 receptor antagonist,
in the treatment of PTSD-related nightmares is growing. Nitrazepam and
triazolam may also be helpful.
Recurrent Isolated Sleep Paralysis. Improved sleep hygiene and




<<<PAGE 2149>>>

melatonin may inhibit ovarian function, and for that reason, it has been
evaluated as a contraceptive, but with inconclusive results.
Drug Interactions. As a dietary supplement preparation, exogenous
melatonin is not regulated by the FDA and has not been subjected to the same
type of drug interaction studies that were performed for ramelteon. Caution is
suggested in coadministering melatonin with blood thinners (e.g., warfarin
[Coumadin], aspirin, and heparin), antiseizure medications, and medications
that lower BP.
Laboratory Interference. Melatonin is not known to interfere with any
commonly used clinical laboratory tests.
Dosage and Administration. Over-the-counter melatonin is available in
the following formulations: 1-, 2.5-, 3-, and 5-mg capsules; 1-mg/4-mL
liquid; 0.5- and 3-mg lozenges; 2.5-mg sublingual tablets; and 1-, 2-, and 3mg timed-release tablets.
Standard recommendations are to take the desired melatonin dose at
bedtime, but some evidence from clinical trials suggests that dosing up to 2
hours before habitual bedtime may produce a more significant improvement
in sleep onset.
Agomelatine (Valdoxan). Agomelatine is structurally related to melatonin
and is used in Europe as a treatment for MDD. It acts as an agonist at
melatonin (MT1 and MT2) receptors. It also acts as a serotonin antagonist.
Analysis of agomelatine clinical trial data raised serious questions about the
efficacy and safety of the drug. The drug is not being marketed in the United
States.

PRAZOSIN
Prazosin (Minipress) is a quinazoline derivative and one of a new chemical
class of antihypertensives. It is an α1-adrenergic receptor antagonist as
opposed to the drugs mentioned above, which are α2-blockers.
Pharmacologic Actions




<<<PAGE 2150>>>

The exact mechanism of the hypotensive action of prazosin, and how it
suppresses nightmares, is unknown. Prazosin causes a decrease in total
peripheral resistance that is related to its action as an α1-adrenergic receptor
antagonist. BP is lowered in both the supine and standing positions. This
effect is most pronounced on the diastolic BP. After oral administration,
human plasma concentrations reach a peak at about 3 hours with a plasma
half-life of 2 to 3 hours. The drug is highly bound to plasma protein.
Tolerance has not been observed to develop with long-term therapy.
Therapeutic Action
Prazosin is used in psychiatry to suppress nightmares, particularly those
associated with PTSD.
Precautions and Adverse Reactions
During clinical trials and subsequent marketing experience, the most frequent
reactions were dizziness (10.3 percent); headache (7.8 percent); drowsiness
(7.6 percent); lack of energy (6.9 percent); weakness (6.5 percent);
palpitations (5.3 percent); and nausea (4.9 percent). In most instances, side
effects disappeared with continued therapy or have been tolerated with no
decrease in the dose of the drug. Prazosin should not be used in nursing
mothers or during pregnancy.
Drug Interactions
No adverse drug interactions have been reported.
Laboratory Interferences
No laboratory interferences have been reported.
Dosage and Clinical Guidelines
The drug is supplied in 1-, 2-, and 5-mg capsules and a nasal spray. The
therapeutic dosages most commonly used have ranged from 6 to 15 mg daily
given in divided doses. Doses higher than 20 mg do not increase efficacy.
When adding a diuretic or other antihypertensive agent, the dose should be
reduced to 1 or 2 mg three times a day, and retitration then carried out.




<<<PAGE 2151>>>

Concomitant use with a PDE-5 inhibitor can result in additive BP-lowering
effects and symptomatic hypotension; therefore, PDE-5 inhibitor therapy
should be initiated at the lowest dose in patients taking prazosin.

21.6 Stimulants
STIMULANT DRUGS AND ATOMOXETINE
Stimulant drugs increase motivation, mood, energy, and wakefulness. They
are also called sympathomimetics because they mimic the physiologic effects
of the neurotransmitter epinephrine. Several chemical classes are included in
this group.
Currently, these drugs are most commonly used to treat symptoms of poor
concentration and hyperactivity in children and adults with ADHD.
Paradoxically, many patients with ADHD find that these drugs can have a
calming effect. Sympathomimetics are also approved for use in increasing
alertness in narcolepsy.
Amphetamines were the first stimulants to be synthesized. They were
created in the late 19th century and were used by Bavarian soldiers in the
mid-1880s to maintain wakefulness, alertness, energy, and confidence in
combat. They have been used similarly in most wars since then. They were
not widely used clinically until the 1930s when they were marketed as
Benzedrine inhalers for relief of nasal congestion. When their
psychostimulant effects were noted, these drugs were used to treat sleepiness
associated with narcolepsy. They have been classified as controlled drugs
because of their rapid onset, immediate behavioral effects, and propensity to
develop tolerance, which leads to the risk of abuse and dependence in
vulnerable individuals. State and federal agencies regulate their manufacture,
distribution, and use. In 2005, pemoline was withdrawn from the market
because of significant risks of treatment-emergent hepatotoxicity.
Sympathomimetics have been widely used in persons with ADHD and
narcolepsy because no equally effective agents have been available. They
have also been found useful in treating certain cognitive disorders that result
in secondary depression or profound apathy (e.g., AIDS, multiple sclerosis,




<<<PAGE 2153>>>

amphetamine molecule. In most cases, this makes the drug better tolerated,
but some patients experience a more significant benefit from the mixed
isomer preparation.
Methylphenidate, dextroamphetamine, and amphetamine are indirectly
acting sympathomimetics, with the primary effect causing the release of
catecholamines from presynaptic neurons. Their clinical effectiveness is
associated with increased release of both dopamine and norepinephrine.
Dextroamphetamine and methylphenidate are also weak inhibitors of
catecholamine reuptake and inhibitors of monoamine oxidase.
In recent years, there has been an explosion of new brand name stimulants.
Most of these are variations of the generic methylphenidate or mixed
amphetamine salts that provide additional options to customize treatment in
terms of dosing and duration of effect.
For modafinil, the specific mechanism of action is unknown. Narcolepsy–
cataplexy results from a deficiency of hypocretin, a hypothalamic
neuropeptide. Hypocretin-producing neurons are activated after modafinil
administration. Modafinil does not appear to work through a dopaminergic
mechanism. It does have α1-adrenergic agonist properties, which may
account for its alerting effects, because the wakefulness induced by modafinil
can be attenuated by prazosin, an α1-adrenergic antagonist. Some evidence
suggests that modafinil has some norepinephrine reuptake blocking effects.
Armodafinil (Nuvigil) is the R-enantiomer of modafinil. Both drugs have
similar clinical effects and side effects.
Therapeutic Indications
Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD). Sympathomimetics
are the first-line drugs for the treatment of ADHD in children and are
effective about 75 percent of the time. Methylphenidate and
dextroamphetamine are equally effective and work within 15 to 30 minutes.
Sympathomimetic drugs decrease hyperactivity, increase attentiveness, and
reduce impulsivity. They may also reduce comorbid oppositional behaviors
associated with ADHD. Many persons take these drugs throughout their
schooling and beyond. In responsive persons, the use of a sympathomimetic
may be a critical determinant of scholastic success.
Sympathomimetics improve the core ADHD symptoms of hyperactivity,




<<<PAGE 2278>>>

a major active metabolite of buspirone: assessment of pharmacokinetics
and 5-hydroxytryptamine 1A receptor occupancy in rats. Drug Metab
Dispos. 2007;35(8):1387–1392.
Drugs Used to Treat Sleep Disorders
Bannan N, Rooney S, O’Connor J. Zopiclone misuse: an update from Dublin.
Drug Alcohol Rev. 2007;26:83–85.
Boehlein JK, Kinzie JD. Pharmacologic reduction of CNS noradrenergic
activity in PTSD: the case for clonidine and prazosin. J Psychiatr Pract.
2007;13:72–78.
Calvo JR, Gonzalez-Yanes C, Maldonado M. The role of melatonin in the
cells of the innate immunity: a review. J Pineal Res. 2013;55(2):103–120.
DeMicco M, Wang-Weigand S, Zhang J. Long-term therapeutic effects of
ramelteon treatment in adults with chronic insomnia: a 1-year study. Sleep.
2006;
29(Suppl):A234.
Doghramji K. Melatonin and its receptors: a new class of sleep-promoting
agents. J Clin Sleep Med. 2007;3(5 Suppl):S17.
Erman M, Seiden D, Zammit G, Sainati S, Zhang J. An efficacy, safety, and
dose-response study of ramelteon in patients with chronic primary
insomnia. Sleep Med. 2006;7(1):17–24.
Johnson MW, Suess PE, Griffiths RR. Ramelteon: a novel hypnotic lacking
abuse liability and sedative adverse effects. Arch Gen Psychiatry.
2006;63(10):
1149–1157.
Karim A, Bradford D, Siebert F, Zhao Z. Pharmacokinetic effect of multiple
oral doses of donepezil on ramelteon, and vice versa, in healthy adults.
Sleep. 2007;
30(Suppl):A244.
Kato K, Hirai K, Nishiyama K, Uchikawa O, Fukatsu K. Neurochemical
properties of ramelteon (TAK-375), a selective MT1/MT2 receptor agonist.
Neuropharmacology. 2005;48(2):301–310.
Lemmer B. The sleep–wake cycle and sleeping pills. Physiol Behav.
2009;90:285.
Lieberman JA. Update on the safety considerations in the management of
insomnia with hypnotics: incorporating modified-release formulations into




<<<PAGE 3690>>>

cognitive continuum, 264, 264f
course and prognosis, 264–265
criteria for, 262, 262t
definition, 262
epidemiology and etiology, 265, 265f
historical perspective, 263
terms related to, 263t
treatment, 265, 266t
Milieu therapy, 794
Military psychiatry, 834
Miller, Neal, 765
Million Clinical Multiaxial Inventory (MCMI), 58t
Millon Adolescent Personality Inventory (MAPI), 83t
Milnacipran, 635
Miltown. See Meprobamate
Mini-Mental Status Examination (MMSE), 9, 45, 52, 89
Minipress. See Prazosin
Minnesota model, 214
Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory (MMPI), 1041
Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory 2 (MMPI-2), 54t, 55, 56,
57, 58t
Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory-Adolescent (MMPI-A),
83t
Minocycline, 592
Mirapex. See Pramipexole
Mirtazapine
dosage and administration, 638
drug interactions, 638
mechanism of action, 637
precautions and adverse reactions, 637–638, 637t
therapeutic indications, 637
Mixed receptive–expressive language deficits, 112–114. See also
Language disorders
MMPI. See Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory (MMPI)
MMSE. See Mini-Mental Status Examination (MMSE)
M’Naghten rule, 843
Mobile or cell phone compulsion, 333




<<<PAGE 3718>>>

diagnosis and clinical features, 171–172
avoidance, 171
depressive episodes, 172
hyperarousal, 171
negative alterations in cognition, 171
reexperiencing traumatic event, 171
differential diagnosis for, 172, 433, 433t
and dissociative amnesia, 440
in DSM-5 and ICD-10, 431t
epidemiology, 173–174, 435
etiology, 174
biologic factors, 174
psychological factors, 174
social factors, 174
genetics and risk for, 436
pathology and laboratory examination, 172
positive prognostic factors for, 434t
predisposing vulnerability factors in, 436t
psychotherapy for, 435
risk factors, 435, 436
treatment, 172–173
CBITS, 172–173
psychopharmacological, 173
SPARCS, 173
TARGET, 173
trauma-focused CBT, 172
Potency of drug, 602
Prader–Willi syndrome, 86t, 95, 101, 102. See also Intellectual disability
(ID)
Pragmatics, 107
Pramipexole, 598, 705
for restless legs syndrome, 515
Prazosin, 681–682
Prazosin, for PTSD-related nightmares, 515
Preconscious system, 1060
Prefrontal cortex (PFC), 398, 1037
mood and, 934, 935


