<<<PAGE 440>>>

is also an antihypertensive agent, it causes a decrease in blood pressure and
heart rate. We should monitor vital signs in patients, especially during
initiation and titration of the dose. Common side effects include somnolence,
headache, upper abdominal pain, and fatigue. When tapering the drug, the
rate should be no more than 0.1 mg every 3 to 7 days.
Extended-release guanfacine is a once-a-day medication for children
between 6 and 17 years of age, available in 1-mg, 2-mg, 3-mg, and 4-mg
tabs. It is swallowed whole with liquids, and the patient should not take it
with a high-fat meal. It is initiated as a 1-mg tab daily and titrated by 1
mg/day at 1-week intervals. The maximum dose approved is 4 mg/day. As a
monotherapy, improvement in ADHD symptoms occurs at 0.05 to 0.08
mg/kg once daily. As an adjunctive treatment, optimal doses are reported to
range from 0.05 to 0.12 mg/kg/day. Common side effects include
somnolence, sedation, fatigue, nausea, hypotension, insomnia, and dizziness.
We should monitor the heart rate and blood pressure. When discontinuing the
drug, one should use a gradual taper, decreasing by 1 mg every 3 to 7 days.
α-Adrenergic agents, including the short- and extended-release
preparations of guanfacine and clonidine, are sometimes preferred treatments
in children with ADHD and comorbid tic disorders when stimulants
exacerbated the tics. Bupropion is somewhat useful for some children and
adolescents in the treatment of ADHD. One multisite, double-blind, placebocontrolled study found a positive result regarding the efficacy of bupropion.
No further studies have compared bupropion with other stimulants. There is a
higher risk of seizures at doses of 400 mg/day or more.
Few data confirm the efficacy of SSRIs in the treatment of ADHD, but due
to the frequency of comorbid depression and anxiety with ADHD, in cases of
comorbidity, the SSRIs are likely to be considered at least in conjunction
with a stimulant.
We should not use tricyclic drugs for ADHD due to potential cardiac
arrhythmia effects. The reports of sudden death in at least four children with
ADHD using desipramine have made the tricyclic antidepressants an unlikely
choice. Antipsychotics may treat refractory severely hyperactive children and
adolescents who are significantly dysfunctional. Antipsychotics are generally
not chosen in the treatment of ADHD due to the risks of tardive dyskinesia,
withdrawal dyskinesia, neuroleptic malignant syndrome, and weight gain.
Modafinil, another type of CNS stimulant, a narcolepsy treatment, may




<<<PAGE 998>>>

Psychopharmacological Therapies
Table 4-32 lists the pharmacotherapies typically used for tobacco use
disorder.
Table 4-32
FDA-Approved Medications for Smoking Cessation
Product

Route of
Availability Usual Dose
Administration

Nicotine Replacement Medications
NicoDerm, Habitrol,
Generic versions

Patch

OTC

Nicorette, Commit,
Generic versions

Oral (Gum,
Lozenge)

OTC

Nicotrol

Inhaled (Nasal
Spray,
Inhaler)

Prescription

Varies by
product and
amount a
person has
smoked. See
manufacturer
guidelines
for specific
instructions

Non-Nicotine Medications
Bupropion (marketed Pill
as Zyban, however
brand discontinued
by manufacturer, in
US)

Prescription Starting: 150
mg × 3 days
After 3 days
increase to
150 twice a
day
Begin 1 wk




<<<PAGE 1000>>>

immediately on awakening. Generally, 9 to 20 lozenges a day are used during
the first 6 weeks, with a decrease in dosage after that. Lozenges offer the
highest level of nicotine of all nicotine replacement products. Users must
suck the lozenge until dissolved and not swallow it. Side effects include
insomnia, nausea, heartburn, headache, and hiccups.
Nicotine patches also sold over the counter, are available in a 16-hour, notaper preparation and a 24- or 16-hour tapering preparation. Patches are
administered each morning and produce blood concentrations about half
those of smoking. Compliance is high, and the only significant adverse
effects are rashes and, with 24-hour wear, insomnia. Using gum and patches
in high-risk situations increases quit rates by another 5 to 10 percent. After 6
to 12 weeks, patients should discontinue the patch.
Nicotine nasal spray, available only by prescription, produces nicotine
concentrations in the blood that are more similar to those from smoking a
cigarette, and it appears to be especially helpful for heavily dependent
smokers. The spray, however, causes rhinitis, watering eyes, and coughing in
more than 70 percent of patients.
The nicotine inhaler, also available only by prescription, was designed to
deliver nicotine to the lungs, but the nicotine is absorbed in the upper throat.
It delivers 4 mg per cartridge, and resultant nicotine levels are low. The
primary asset of the inhaler is that it provides a behavioral substitute for
smoking. The inhaler doubles quit rates. These devices require frequent
puffing—about 20 minutes to extract 4 mg of nicotine—and have minor
adverse effects.
Non-Nicotine Medications. Non-nicotine therapy may help smokers who
object philosophically to the notion of replacement therapy and smokers who
fail replacement therapy. Bupropion is an antidepressant medication that has
both dopaminergic and adrenergic actions. Bupropion SR started at 150
mg/day for 3 days and increased to 150 mg twice a day for 6 to 12 weeks.
Daily dosages of 300 mg double quit rates in smokers with and without a
history of depression. In one study, a combined bupropion and nicotine patch
had higher quit rates than either alone. Adverse effects include insomnia and
nausea, but these are rarely significant. Contraindications to use of bupropion
include a seizure disorder (the risk of seizures in those appropriately screened
is less than 1 in 1,000), current/past bulimia or anorexia nervosa,




<<<PAGE 1249>>>

sweating, male
sexual
dysfunction
Desvenlafaxine

50–100

Dry mouth,
dizziness,
nausea,
sweating

None

Duloxetine

30–120

Nausea, dry mouth, None
constipation,
insomnia, male
sexual
dysfunction

Levomilnacipran

20–80

Nausea, dry mouth, None
headaches, male
sexual
dysfunction

Other Second-Generation and Novel Antidepressants
Agomelatinea

25–50

None

None

Bupropion

150–450

Insomnia, dry
mouth, nausea

Headaches

Mirtazapine

15–60

Dry mouth,
constipation,
increased
appetite, weight
gain

Somnolence

Moclobemidea

300–600

None

None

Vilazodone

10–40

Diarrhea, nausea,
headaches

None

Vortioxetine

10–20

Nausea

None

aNot routinely available in the United States.




<<<PAGE 1901>>>

recovery. Treatment-emergent increase in body weight is a common reason
for noncompliance with a drug regimen. No specific mechanisms have been
identified as causing weight gain, and it appears that the histamine and
serotonin systems mediate changes in weight associated with many drugs
used to treat depression and psychosis. Metformin (Glucophage) has been
reported to facilitate weight loss among patients whose weight gain is
attributed to the use of serotonin-dopamine reuptake inhibitors and valproic
acid (Depakene). Valproate (Depacon), as well as olanzapine, has been linked
to the development of insulin resistance, which could induce appetite
increase, with the subsequent weight increase. Weight gain is a noteworthy
side effect of clozapine (Clozaril) and olanzapine. Genetic factors that
regulate body weight, as well as the related problem of diabetes mellitus,
seem to involve the 5-HT2C receptor. There is a genetic polymorphism of the
promoter region of this receptor, and patients with a variant allele have less
weight gain. Drugs with a strong 5-HT2C affinity would be expected to have a
more significant impact on body weight of patients with a polymorphism of
the 5-HT2C receptor promoter region.
Weight Loss. Initial weight loss is associated with SSRI treatment but is
usually transient, with most weight being regained within the first few
months. Bupropion (Wellbutrin) has been shown to cause modest weight loss
that is sustained. When combined with diet and lifestyle changes, bupropion
can facilitate more significant weight loss. Topiramate (Topamax) and
zonisamide (Zonegran), marketed as treatments for epilepsy, sometimes
produce substantial, sustained loss of weight.
Glucose Changes. Increased risk of glucose abnormalities, including
diabetes mellitus, is associated with weight increase during psychotropic drug
therapy. Clozapine and olanzapine are associated with a greater risk than
other SDAs of abnormalities in fasting glucose levels, as well as
hyperosmolar diabetes and ketoacidosis. This dysregulation of glucose
homeostasis appears to be drug-induced and increases glucagon.
Hyponatremia. Hyponatremia is associated with oxcarbazepine (Trileptal)
and SSRI treatment, especially in elderly patients. Confusion, agitation, and
lethargy are common symptoms.




<<<PAGE 1985>>>

spectrum disorders. Fluoxetine has been reported to be useful for features of
autism in children, adolescents, and adults.
Precautions and Adverse Reactions. SSRI side effects need to be
considered in terms of their onset, duration, and severity. For example,
nausea and jitteriness are early, generally mild, and time-limited side effects.
Although SSRIs share similar side effect profiles, individual drugs in this
class may cause a higher rate or carry a more severe risk of specific side
effects depending on the patient.
Sexual Dysfunction. All SSRIs cause sexual dysfunction, and it is the
most common adverse effect of SSRIs associated with long-term treatment. It
has an estimated incidence of between 50 and 80 percent. The most common
complaints are anorgasmia, inhibited orgasm, and decreased libido. Some
studies suggest that sexual dysfunction is dose-related, but this has not been
established. Unlike most of the other adverse effects of SSRIs, sexual
inhibition rarely resolves in the first few weeks of use but usually continues
as long as the drug is taken. In some cases, there may be an improvement
over time.
Strategies to counteract SSRI-induced sexual dysfunction are numerous,
and none has been proven to be very useful. Some reports suggest decreasing
the dosage or adding bupropion (Wellbutrin) or amphetamine. Reports have
described successful treatment of SSRI-induced sexual dysfunction with
agents such as sildenafil (Viagra), which are used to treat erectile
dysfunction. Ultimately, patients may need to be switched to antidepressants
that do not interfere with sexual functioning, drugs such as mirtazapine or
bupropion.
Gastrointestinal Adverse Effects. GI side effects are widespread and
are mediated mainly through effects on the serotonin 5-HT3 receptor. The
most frequent GI complaints are nausea, diarrhea, anorexia, vomiting,
flatulence, and dyspepsia. Sertraline and fluvoxamine produce the most
intense GI symptoms. Delayed-release paroxetine, compared with the
immediate-release preparation of paroxetine, has less intense GI side effects
during the first week of treatment. However, paroxetine, because of its
anticholinergic activity, frequently causes constipation. Nausea and loose




<<<PAGE 1997>>>

Loss of Efficacy. Some patients report a diminished response or total loss
of response to SSRIs with recurrence of depressive symptoms while
remaining on a full dose of medication. The exact mechanism of this socalled “poop-out” is unknown, but the phenomenon is genuine. Potential
remedies for the attenuation of the response to SSRIs include increasing or
decreasing the dosage, tapering drug use, and then rechallenging with the
same medication, switching to another SSRI or non-SSRI antidepressant, and
augmenting with bupropion or another augmentation agent.
Vortioxetine (Trintellix). Vortioxetine works mainly as an inhibitor of
serotonin (5-HT) reuptake, but it has a more complex pharmacologic profile
than other SSRIs. It also acts as an agonist at 5-HT1A receptors, a partial
agonist at 5-HT1B receptors, and an antagonist at 5-HT3, 5-HT1D, and 5-HT7
receptors. The contribution of each of these activities to the drug’s
antidepressant effect has not been established, but it is the only compound
with this combination of pharmacodynamic actions.
Side effects seen during the trials include, but are not limited to, nausea,
constipation, and vomiting.
The recommended starting dose is 10 mg administered orally once daily
without regard to meals. The dose should then be increased to 20 mg/day, as
tolerated. A dose of 5 mg/day should be considered for patients who do not
tolerate higher doses.
The maximum recommended dose of vortioxetine is 10 mg/day in known
CYP2D6 poor metabolizers. Reduction of the dose of vortioxetine by onehalf is suggested when patients are receiving a CYP2D6 potent inhibitor
(e.g., bupropion, fluoxetine, paroxetine, or quinidine) concomitantly. The
dose should be increased to the original dose of vortioxetine in patients who
stop taking CYP inducers (e.g., rifampin, carbamazepine, or phenytoin). This
adjustment is especially essential when a potent CYP inducer is
coadministered for greater than 14 days. The maximum recommended dose
should not exceed three times the original dose. The dose of vortioxetine
should be reduced to the original level within 14 days when the inducer is
discontinued.
Although vortioxetine can be abruptly discontinued, in placebo-controlled
trials, patients experienced transient adverse reactions such as headache and




<<<PAGE 2005>>>

and 120 mg/day were used, they were administered as 40 or 60 mg twice
daily. It remains to be seen to what extent dosages above 60 mg/day will be
necessary and whether this will require divided doses to make the drug
tolerable.
Milnacipran and Levomilnacipran
Milnacipran is only FDA approved for the treatment of fibromyalgia.
Although some countries have approved milnacipran for general use as an
antidepressant, efficacy is not as well established. Compared with
venlafaxine, milnacipran is approximately five times more potent for
inhibition of norepinephrine uptake than for 5-HT reuptake inhibition.
Milnacipran has a half-life of approximately 8 hours and shows linear
pharmacokinetics between doses of 50 and 250 mg/day. Milnacipran has no
active metabolites, and it is directly metabolized in the liver. The kidneys
primarily excrete milnacipran.
Milnacipran is available as 12.5-, 25-, 50-, and 100-mg tablets. The
standard recommended milnacipran dose is as follows: day 1, 12.5 mg once
daily; days 2 and 3, 12.5 mg twice daily; days 4 to 7, 25 mg twice daily; and
day 7 and beyond, 50 mg twice daily.
Levomilnacipran was approved in 2013 by the FDA as a treatment for
MDD in adults. Levomilnacipran is an active enantiomer of the racemic drug
milnacipran. In vitro studies have shown that it has greater potency for
norepinephrine reuptake inhibition than for serotonin reuptake inhibition and
does not directly affect the uptake of dopamine or other neurotransmitters. It
is taken once daily as a sustained-release formulation. In clinical trials, doses
of 40, 80, or 120 mg improved symptoms compared with placebo.
The most common adverse reactions in the placebo-controlled trials were
nausea, constipation, hyperhidrosis, increased heart rate, erectile dysfunction,
tachycardia, vomiting, and palpitations. Rates of adverse events were
generally consistent across the 40- to 120-mg dose range. The only doserelated adverse events were urinary hesitation and erectile dysfunction.

BUPROPION
Bupropion (Wellbutrin, Wellbutrin SR, Wellbutrin XL) is an antidepressant
drug that inhibits the reuptake of norepinephrine and, possibly, dopamine.




<<<PAGE 2006>>>

Most significantly, it does not act on the serotonin system like SSRI
antidepressants. This novel action results in a side effect profile characterized
by a low risk of sexual dysfunction and sedation and with modest weight loss
during acute and long-term treatment. No withdrawal syndrome has been
linked to discontinuation of bupropion. Although increasingly used as firstline monotherapy, a significant percentage of bupropion use occurs as add-on
therapy to other antidepressants, usually SSRIs. Bupropion was marketed
under the name Zyban for use in smoking cessation regimens. However, the
manufacturer has discontinued that brand in the United States.
Pharmacologic Actions
Three formulations of bupropion are available: immediate-release (taken
three times daily), sustained-release (taken twice daily), and extended-release
(taken once daily). The different versions of the drug contain the same active
ingredient but differ in their pharmacokinetics and dosing. There have been
reports of inconsistencies in bioequivalence between various branded and
generic versions of bupropion. If a patient experiences changes in adverse
effects or efficacy, the clinician should inquire whether there has been a
change of formulation.
Immediate-release bupropion is well absorbed from the GI tract. Peak
plasma concentrations of bupropion are usually reached within 2 hours of
oral administration, and peak levels of the sustained-release version are seen
after 3 hours. The mean half-life of the compound is 12 hours, ranging from 8
to 40 hours. Peak levels of extended-release bupropion occur 5 hours after
ingestion. This pharmacokinetic profile provides a longer time to maximum
plasma concentration (tmax) but comparable peak and trough plasma
concentrations. The 24-hour exposure occurring after administration of the
extended-release version of 300 mg once daily is equivalent to that provided
by sustained release of 150 mg twice daily. Clinically, this permits the drug
to be taken once a day in the morning. Plasma levels are also reduced in the
evening, making it less likely for some patients to experience treatmentrelated insomnia.
The mechanism of action for the antidepressant effects of bupropion is
presumed to involve the inhibition of dopamine and norepinephrine reuptake.
Bupropion binds to the dopamine transporter in the brain. The effects of




<<<PAGE 2007>>>

bupropion on smoking cessation may be related to its effects on dopamine
reward pathways or inhibition of nicotinic acetylcholine receptors.
Therapeutic Indications
Depression. Although overshadowed by the SSRIs as first-line treatment
for major depression, the therapeutic efficacy of bupropion in depression is
well established in both outpatient and inpatient settings. Observed rates of
response and remission are comparable to those seen with the SSRIs.
Bupropion has been found to prevent seasonal major depressive episodes in
patients with a history of seasonal patterns or affective disorder.
Smoking Cessation. Bupropion is indicated for use in combination with
behavioral modification programs for smoking cessation. It is intended to be
used in patients who are highly motivated and who receive some form of
structured behavioral support. Bupropion is most effective when combined
with nicotine substitutes (Nico-Derm, Nicotrol).
Bipolar Disorders. Bupropion is less likely than TCAs to precipitate mania
in persons with bipolar I disorder and less likely than other antidepressants to
exacerbate or induce rapid-cycling bipolar II disorder; however, the evidence
about the use of bupropion in the treatment of patients with bipolar disorder
is limited.
Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder. Bupropion is used as a
second-line agent, after the sympathomimetics, for treatment of ADHD. It
has not been compared with proven ADHD medications such as
methylphenidate (Ritalin) or atomoxetine (Strattera) for childhood and adult
ADHD. Bupropion is an appropriate choice for persons with comorbid
ADHD and depression or persons with comorbid ADHD, conduct disorder,
or substance use disorder. It may also be considered for use in patients who
develop tics when treated with psychostimulants.
Cocaine Detoxification. Bupropion may be associated with a euphoric
feeling; thus, it may be contraindicated in persons with histories of substance
abuse. However, because of its dopaminergic effects, bupropion has been
explored as a treatment for cocaine cravings. Results have been inconclusive,




<<<PAGE 2008>>>

with some patients showing a reduction in drug craving and others finding
their cravings increased.
Hypoactive Sexual Desire Disorder. Bupropion is often added to drugs
such as SSRIs to counteract sexual side effects and may be helpful as a
treatment for nondepressed individuals with a disorder of sexual desire.
Bupropion may improve sexual arousal, orgasm completion, and sexual
satisfaction.
Precautions and Adverse Reactions
Headache, insomnia, dry mouth, tremor, and nausea are the most common
side effects. Restlessness, agitation, and irritability may also occur. Patients
with severe anxiety or panic disorder should not be prescribed bupropion.
Most likely, because of its potentiating effects on dopaminergic
neurotransmission, bupropion can cause psychotic symptoms, including
hallucinations, delusions, and catatonia, as well as delirium. Most notable
about bupropion is the absence of significant drug-induced orthostatic
hypotension, weight gain, daytime drowsiness, and anticholinergic effects.
Some persons, however, may experience dry mouth or constipation and
weight loss. Hypertension may occur in some patients, but bupropion causes
no other significant cardiovascular or clinical laboratory changes. Bupropion
exerts indirect sympathomimetic activity, producing positive inotropic effects
in the human myocardium, an effect that may reflect catecholamine release.
Some patients experience cognitive impairment, most notably word-finding
difficulties.
Concern about seizure has deterred some physicians from prescribing
bupropion. The risk of seizure is dose-dependent. Studies show that at
dosages of 300 mg a day or less of sustainedrelease bupropion, the incidence of seizures is 0.05 percent, which is no
worse than the incidence of seizures with other antidepressants. The risk of
seizures increases to about 0.1 percent with dosages of 400 mg a day.
Changes in electroencephalographic (EEG) waveforms have been reported
to be associated with bupropion use. About 20 percent of individuals treated
with bupropion exhibit spike waves, sharp waves, and focal slowing. The
likelihood of women having sharp waves is higher than for men. The




<<<PAGE 2009>>>

presence of these waveforms in individuals taking a medication known to
lower the seizure threshold may be a risk factor for developing seizures.
Other risk factors for seizures include a history of seizures, use of alcohol,
recent benzodiazepine withdrawal, organic brain disease, head trauma, or
pretreatment epileptiform discharges on EEG.
The use of bupropion by pregnant women is not associated with a specific
risk of an increased rate of congenital disabilities. Bupropion is secreted in
breast milk, so the use of bupropion in nursing women should be based on the
clinical circumstances of the patient and the judgment of the clinician.
Few deaths have been reported after overdoses of bupropion. Poor
outcomes are associated with cases of massive doses and mixed-drug
overdoses. Seizures occur in about one-third of all overdoses and are dosedependent, with those having seizures ingesting a significantly higher median
dose. Fatalities can involve uncontrollable seizures, sinus bradycardia, and
cardiac arrest. Symptoms of poisoning most often involve seizures, sinus
tachycardia, hypertension, GI symptoms, hallucinations, and agitation. All
seizures are typically brief and self-limited. In general, however, bupropion is
safer in overdose cases than are other antidepressants except for perhaps
SSRIs.
Drug Interactions
Given the fact that bupropion is frequently combined with SSRIs or
venlafaxine, potential interactions are significant. Bupropion has been found
to affect the pharmacokinetics of venlafaxine. One study noted a significant
increase in venlafaxine levels and a consequent decrease in its main
metabolite O-desmethylvenlafaxine during combined treatment with
sustained-release bupropion. Bupropion hydroxylation is weakly inhibited by
venlafaxine. No significant changes in plasma levels of the SSRIs paroxetine
and fluoxetine have been reported. However, few case reports indicate that
the combination of bupropion and fluoxetine (Prozac) may be associated with
panic, delirium, or seizures. Bupropion, in combination with lithium
(Eskalith), may rarely cause CNS toxicity, including seizures.
Because of the possibility of inducing a hypertensive crisis, bupropion
should not be used concurrently with MAOIs. At least 14 days should pass
after the discontinuation of an MAOI before initiating treatment with




<<<PAGE 2010>>>

bupropion. In some cases, the addition of bupropion may permit persons
taking antiparkinsonian medications to lower the doses of their dopaminergic
drugs. However, delirium, psychotic symptoms, and dyskinetic movements
may occur with the coadministration of bupropion and dopaminergic agents,
such as antiparkinsonian meds. Sinus bradycardia may occur when bupropion
is combined with metoprolol.
Carbamazepine (Tegretol) may decrease plasma concentrations of
bupropion, and bupropion may increase plasma concentrations of valproic
acid (Depakene).
In vitro biotransformation studies of bupropion have found that the
formation of a major active metabolite, hydroxybupropion, is mediated by
CYP2B6. Bupropion has a significant inhibitory effect on CYP2D6.
Laboratory Interferences
A report has appeared indicating that bupropion may give a false-positive
result on urinary amphetamine screens. No other reports have appeared of
laboratory interferences associated with bupropion treatment. Clinically
nonsignificant changes in the electrocardiogram (premature beats and
nonspecific ST-T changes) and decreases in the WBC count (by about 10
percent) have been reported in a small number of persons.
Dosage and Clinical Guidelines
Immediate-release bupropion is available in 75-, 100-, and 150-mg tablets.
Sustained-release bupropion is available in 100-, 150-, 200-, and 300-mg
tablets. Extended-release bupropion comes in 150- and 300-mg strengths.
There have been problems associated with one of the extended-release
generic versions called Budeprion XL 300-mg tablets, which was found not
to be therapeutically equivalent to Wellbutrin XL 300 mg and was removed
from the market.
The initiation of immediate-release bupropion in the average adult person
should be 75 mg orally twice a day. On the fourth day of treatment, the
dosage can be increased to 100 mg three times a day. Because 300 mg is the
recommended dose, the person should be maintained on this dose for several
weeks before increasing it further. The maximum dosage, 450 mg a day,
should be given as 150 mg three times a day. Because of the risk of seizures,




<<<PAGE 2011>>>

increases in dose should never exceed 100 mg in 3 days; a single dose of
immediate-release bupropion should never exceed 150 mg, and the total daily
dosage should not exceed 450 mg. The maximum of 400 mg of the sustainedrelease version should be used as a twice-a-day regimen of either 200 mg
twice daily or 300 mg in the morning and 100 mg in the afternoon. A starting
dosage of the sustained-release version, 100 mg once a day, can be increased
to 100 mg twice a day after 4 days. Then 150 mg twice a day may be used. A
single dose of sustained-release bupropion should never exceed 300 mg. The
maximum dosage is 200 mg twice a day of the immediate-release or
extended-release formulations. An advantage of the extended-release
preparation is that the patient can take a single daily dose of 450 mg after
proper titration.
For smoking cessation, the patient should start taking 150 mg a day of
sustained-release bupropion 10 to 14 days before quitting smoking. On the
fourth day, the dosage should be increased to 150 mg twice daily. Treatment
generally lasts 7 to 12 weeks.

MIRTAZAPINE
Mirtazapine (Remeron) is unique among drugs used to treat major depression
in that it increases both norepinephrine and serotonin through a mechanism
other than reuptake blockade (as in the case of tricyclic agents or SSRIs) or
monoamine oxidase inhibition (as in the case of phenelzine or
tranylcypromine). Mirtazapine is also more likely to reduce rather than cause
nausea and diarrhea, the result of its effects on serotonin 5-HT3 receptors.
Characteristic side effects include increased appetite and sedation.
Pharmacologic Actions
Mirtazapine is administered orally and is rapidly and completely absorbed. It
has a half-life of about 30 hours. Peak concentration is achieved within 2
hours of ingestion, and steady state is reached after 6 days. Plasma clearance
may be slowed up to 30 percent in persons with impaired hepatic function, up
to 50 percent in those with impaired renal function, up to 40 percent slower in
older men, and up to 10 percent slower in older women.
The mechanism of action of mirtazapine is the antagonism of central




<<<PAGE 2090>>>

consisting of fever, rash, eosinophilia, and possibly fatal myocarditis.
Cleft palate, fingernail hypoplasia, microcephaly, and spina bifida in
infants may be associated with the maternal use of carbamazepine during
pregnancy. Pregnant women should not use carbamazepine unless necessary.
All women with childbearing potential should take 1 to 4 mg of folic acid
daily, even if they are not trying to conceive. Carbamazepine is secreted in
breast milk.
Drug Interactions. Carbamazepine decreases serum concentrations of
numerous drugs as a result of the prominent induction of hepatic CYP3A4
(Table 21-39). Monitoring for a decrease in clinical effects is frequently
indicated. Carbamazepine can decrease the blood concentrations of oral
contraceptives, resulting in breakthrough bleeding and uncertain prophylaxis
against pregnancy. Carbamazepine should not be administered with MAOIs,
which should be discontinued at least 2 weeks before initiating treatment with
carbamazepine. Grapefruit juice inhibits the hepatic metabolism of
carbamazepine. When carbamazepine and valproate are used in combination,
the dosage of carbamazepine should be decreased because valproate displaces
carbamazepine binding on proteins, and the dosage of valproate may need to
be increased.
Table 21-39
Carbamazepine: Drug Interactions
Effect of Carbamazepine on Plasma Agents that May Affect
Concentrations of Concomitant
Carbamazepine Plasma
Agents
Concentrations
Carbamazepine may decrease drug Agents that may increase
plasma concentration of:
carbamazepine plasma
Acetaminophen
concentration:
Alprazolam
Allopurinol
Amitriptyline
Cimetidine
Bupropion
Clarithromycin
Clomipramine
Danazol
Clonazepam
Diltiazem
Clozapine
Erythromycin




<<<PAGE 2099>>>

general approach is to start with 300 mg on day 1, increase to 600 mg on day
2, 900 mg on day 3, and subsequently increase up to 1,800 mg/day in divided
doses as needed to relieve symptoms. Final total daily doses tend to be
between 1,200 and 2,400 mg/day, but occasionally results may be achieved
with dosages as low as 200 to 300 mg/day, especially in elderly persons.
Sedation is usually the limiting factor in determining the dosage. Some
patients have taken dosages as high as 4,800 mg/day.
Gabapentin is available as 100-, 300-, and 400-mg capsules and as 600and 800-mg tablets. A 250-mg/5-mL oral solution is also available. Although
abrupt discontinuation of gabapentin does not cause withdrawal effects, the
use of all anticonvulsant drugs should be gradually tapered.
Topiramate
Topiramate (Topamax) was developed as an anticonvulsant and was found
useful in a variety of psychiatric and neurologic conditions, including
migraine prevention, treatment of obesity, bulimia, binge eating, and alcohol
dependence.
Pharmacologic Actions. Topiramate has GABAergic effects and
increases cerebral GABA in humans. It has 80 percent oral bioavailability
and is not significantly altered by food. It is 15 percent protein-bound, and
about 70 percent of the drug is eliminated by renal excretion. With renal
insufficiency, topiramate clearance decreases by about 50 percent, so the
dosage needs to be decreased. It has a half-life of around 24 hours.
Therapeutic Indications. Topiramate is used mainly as an antiepileptic
medication and has been found superior to placebo as monotherapy in
patients with seizure disorders. It is also used in the prevention of migraine,
smoking cessation, pain syndromes (e.g., low back pain), PTSD, and
essential tremor. The drug has been associated with weight loss, and that fact
has been used to counteract the weight gain caused by many psychotropic
drugs. It has also been used in general obesity and the treatment of bulimia
and binge-eating disorder. Self-mutilating behavior may be decreased in
borderline personality disorder. It is of little or no benefit in the treatment of
psychotic disorders. In one study, the combination of topiramate with
bupropion (Wellbutrin) showed some efficacy in bipolar depression, but




<<<PAGE 2154>>>

impulsivity, and inattentiveness and permit improved social interactions with
teachers, family, other adults, and peers. The success of long-term treatment
of ADHD with sympathomimetics, which are efficacious for most of the
various constellations of ADHD symptoms present from childhood to
adulthood, supports a model in which ADHD results from a genetically
determined neurochemical imbalance that requires lifelong pharmacologic
management.
Methylphenidate is the most commonly used initial agent at a dosage of 5
to 10 mg every 3 to 4 hours. Dosages may be increased to a maximum of 20
mg four times daily or 1 mg/kg a day. Use of the 20-mg sustained-release
formulation to achieve 6 hours of benefit and eliminate the need for dosing at
school is supported by many experts, although other authorities believe it is
less effective than the immediate-release formulation. Dextroamphetamine is
about twice as potent as methylphenidate on a per milligram basis and
provides 6 to 8 hours of benefit. Some 70 percent of nonresponders to one
sympathomimetic may benefit from another. All of the sympathomimetic
drugs should be tried before switching to drugs of a different class. The
previous dictum that sympathomimetics worsen tics and, therefore, should be
avoided by persons with comorbid ADHD and tic disorders has been
questioned. Small dosages of sympathomimetics do not appear to cause an
increase in the frequency and severity of tics. Alternatives to
sympathomimetics for ADHD include bupropion (Wellbutrin), venlafaxine
(Effexor), guanfacine (Tenex), clonidine (Catapres), and tricyclic drugs.
Further studies are needed to determine whether modafinil improves the
symptoms of ADHD.
Short-term use of sympathomimetics induces a euphoric feeling; however,
tolerance develops for both the euphoric feeling and the sympathomimetic
activity.
Narcolepsy and Hypersomnolence. Narcolepsy consists of sudden
sleep attacks (narcolepsy), sudden loss of postural tone (cataplexy), loss of
voluntary motor control going into (hypnagogic) or coming out of
(hypnopompic) sleep (sleep paralysis), and hypnagogic or hypnopompic
hallucinations. Sympathomimetics reduce narcoleptic sleep attacks and
improve wakefulness in other types of hypersomnolent states. Modafinil is
approved as an antisomnolence agent for the treatment of narcolepsy, for




<<<PAGE 2173>>>

increases the possibility of zidovudine toxicity at otherwise standard dosages.
Moreover, in vitro human liver microsome studies demonstrate competitive
inhibition of methadone demethylation by several protease inhibitors,
including ritonavir (Norvir), indinavir (Crixivan), and saquinavir (Invirase).
The clinical relevance of this finding is unknown.
Fatal drug–drug interactions with the MAOIs are associated with the use of
the opioids fentanyl (Sublimaze) and meperidine (Demerol) but not with the
use of methadone, levomethadyl, or buprenorphine.
Tramadol may interact with drugs that inhibit serotonin reuptake. Such
combinations can trigger seizures and serotonin syndrome. These events may
also develop during tramadol monotherapy, either at routine or excessive
doses. The risk of interactions is increased when tramadol is combined with
virtually all classes of antidepressants and with drugs that lower the seizure
threshold, especially the antidepressant bupropion.
Laboratory Interferences
Methadone and buprenorphine can be tested separately in urine toxicology to
distinguish them from other opioids. No known laboratory interferences are
associated with the use of methadone or buprenorphine.
Dosage and Clinical Guidelines
Methadone. Methadone is supplied in 5-, 10-, and 40-mg dispersible scored
tablets; 40-mg scored wafers; 5-mg/5-mL, 10-mg/5-mL, and 10-mg/mL
solutions; and a 10-mg/mL parenteral form. In maintenance programs,
methadone is usually dissolved in water or juice, and dose administration is
directly observed to ensure compliance. For induction of opioid
detoxification, an initial methadone dose of 15 to 20 mg will usually suppress
craving and withdrawal symptoms. However, some individuals may require
up to 40 mg a day in single or divided doses. Higher dosages should be
avoided during induction of treatment to reduce the risk of acute toxicity
from overdosage.
Over several weeks, the dosage should be raised to at least 70 mg a day.
The maximum dosage is usually 120 mg a day, and higher dosages require
prior approval from regulatory agencies. Dosages above 60 mg a day are
associated with much more complete abstinence from the use of illicit opioids




<<<PAGE 2233>>>

rapid-acting α-receptor–blocking agent should be considered.
Diethylpropion (Tenuate). Diethylpropion preceded its analog, the
antidepressant drug bupropion (Wellbutrin). Diethylpropion comes in two
formulations: a 25-mg tablet and a 75-mg extended-release tablet (Tenuate
Dospan). It is usually taken three times a day, 1 hour before meals (regular
tablets), or once a day in midmorning (extended-release tablets). The
extended-release tablets should be swallowed whole, never crushed, chewed,
or cut. The maximum daily dose is 75 mg.
Side effects include dry mouth, unpleasant taste, restlessness, anxiety,
dizziness, depression, tremors, upset stomach, vomiting, and increased
urination. Side effects that warrant medical attention include tachycardia,
palpitations, blurred vision, skin rash, itching, difficulty breathing, chest pain,
fainting, swelling of the ankles or feet, fever, sore throat, chills, and painful
urination. Diethylpropion was classified as pregnancy Category B in the
former FDA classification system and has low abuse potential. It is listed as a
Schedule IV drug by the DEA.
Orlistat (Xenical, Alli). Orlistat interferes with the absorption of dietary
fats, causing reduced caloric intake. It works by inhibiting gastric and
pancreatic lipases, the enzymes that break down triglycerides in the intestine.
When lipase activity is blocked, triglycerides from the diet are not hydrolyzed
into absorbable free fatty acids and are excreted undigested instead. Only
trace amounts of orlistat are absorbed systemically; it is almost entirely
eliminated through the feces.
The effectiveness of orlistat in promoting weight loss is definite, though
modest. When used as part of a weight loss program, between 30 and 50
percent of patients can expect a 5 percent or more significant decrease in
body mass. About 20 percent achieve at least a 10 percent decrease in body
mass. After orlistat is stopped, up to a third of people gain the weight they
lose.
Among the benefits of orlistat treatment is a decrease in BP and a reduced
risk of developing type 2 diabetes.
The most common subjective side effects of orlistat are GI related and
include steatorrhea, flatulence, fecal incontinence, and frequent or urgent
bowel movements. Patients should avoid foods with high-fat content to




<<<PAGE 2257>>>

Cohen LS, Altshuler LL, Harlow BL, Nonacs R, Newport DJ. Relapse of
major depression during pregnancy in women who maintain or discontinue
antidepressant treatment. JAMA. 2006;295:499.
Cooper-Kazaz A, Apter JT, Cohen R, Karapichev L, Mohammed-Moussa S.
Combined treatment with sertraline and liothyronine in major depression: a
randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Arch Gen Psychiatry.
2007;64:679–688.
Couturier J, Sy A, Johnson N, Findlay S. Bone mineral density in adolescents
with eating disorders exposed to selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors.
Eat Disord. 2013;21(3):238–248.
Cowen P, Sherwood AC. The role of serotonin in cognitive function:
evidence from recent studies and implications for understanding
depression. J Psychopharmacol. 2013;27(7):575–583.
Danish University Antidepressant Group. Paroxetine: a selective serotonin
reuptake inhibitor showing better tolerance, but weaker antidepressant
effect than clomipramine in a controlled multicenter study. J Affect Dis.
1990;18:289.
DeBattista C, Schatzberg AF. Bupropion. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P,
eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed.
Vol. 2. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:3056.
DeBattista C, Solvason B, Poirier J, Kendrick E, Loraas E. A placebocontrolled, randomized, double-blind study of adjunctive bupropion
sustained release in the treatment of SSRI-induced sexual dysfunction. J
Clin Psychiatry. 2005; 66(7):
844–848.
DeBattista C, Solvason HB, Poirier J, Kendrick E, Schatzberg AF. A
prospective trial of bupropion SR augmentation of partial and nonresponders to serotonergic antidepressants. J Clin Psychopharmacol.
2003;23(1):27–30.
DeBattista C. Augmentation and combination strategies for depression. J
Psychopharmacol. 2006;20(3 Suppl):11–18.
DellaGioia N, Devine L, Pittman B, Hannestad J. Bupropion pretreatment of
endotoxininduced depressive symptoms. Brain Behav Immun. 2013;31:197–204.
DeSanty KP, Amabile CM. Antidepressant-induced liver injury. Ann
Pharmacother. 2007;41(7):1201.


