<<<PAGE 414>>>

and inattention in preschoolers with autism spectrum disorder found the
stimulant safe and relatively efficacious; half of the preschoolers developed
side effects including increased stereotypies, gastrointestinal upset, sleep
problems, and emotional lability. Among nonstimulants, one double-blind
placebo-controlled study of hyperactivity, impulsivity, and inattention using
atomoxetine in children with autism spectrum disorder found that it was
significantly more effective than placebo. Side effects included sedation,
irritability, constipation, and nausea. Clonidine, an α-agonist, has also been
studied in children with autism spectrum disorder for the treatment of
hyperactivity with mixed results. Guanfacine may also help in some cases.
Repetitive and Stereotypic Behavior. Antidepressants and mood
stabilizers have been studied for the treatment of these core symptoms of
autism spectrum disorder. One study with fluoxetine found the medication
group only slightly better and not significantly better than the placebo group
regarding the target symptoms, and another trial with escitalopram found no
difference between groups. Risperidone, however, was found to be effective
in targeting irritability, and restrictive and repetitive behaviors were
improved. One study using valproate in a 12-week trial with 55 children with
a mean age of 9½ years with autism spectrum disorder found that those who
were considered responders to irritability also spent less time engaging in
repetitive behaviors.
Agents Administered for Behavioral Impairment in Autism
Spectrum Disorder Based On Open Trials. Quetiapine is an
antipsychotic with more potent 5-HT2A than D2 receptor blocking properties.
Although there are only open-label trials with this agent, some experts use
this when risperidone and olanzapine fail or are intolerable. Doses range from
50 to 200 mg/day. Adverse effects include drowsiness, tachycardia, agitation,
and weight gain.
Clozapine has a heterocyclic chemical structure that is related to certain
first-generation antipsychotics, such as loxapine, although clozapine carries a
lower risk of extrapyramidal symptoms. It is not generally used in the
treatment of aggression and self-injurious behavior unless those behaviors
coexist with psychotic symptoms. The most severe adverse effect is
agranulocytosis, which necessitates monitoring white blood cell count weekly




<<<PAGE 567>>>

depression severity pretreatment and posttreatment using parent ratings on
the Preschool Reelings Checklist-Scale Version (PFC-S), a 20-item checklist.
Results revealed that both groups showed significant improvement, with
particular improvement in the PCIT-ED group concerning emotion
recognition, child executive functioning, and parenting stress. This pilot
study indicates that PCIT-ED is a promising novel intervention for preschool
depression that deserves further investigation.
Pharmacotherapy
Fluoxetine and escitalopram have FDA approval in the treatment of major
depression in adolescents. Three RCTs of fluoxetine in depressed children
and adolescents demonstrate its efficacy. The common side effects are similar
as for adults: headache, gastrointestinal symptoms, sedation, and insomnia.
Short-term randomized clinical trials have demonstrated the efficacy of
citalopram and sertraline compared with placebo in the treatment of major
depression in children and adolescents. Sertraline was efficacious in two
multicenter, double-blind, placebo-controlled trials of 376 children and
adolescents. The doses of sertraline ranged from 50 to 200 mg a day or
placebo. Nearly 70 percent of the subjects had a greater than 40 percent
decrease in depression rating scale scores (compared with 56 percent in the
placebo group). The most common side effects are anorexia, vomiting,
diarrhea, and agitation.
Citalopram has been demonstrated in one RCT in the United States to be
efficacious in 174 children and adolescents treated with citalopram at doses
of 20 to 40 mg a day or placebo for 8 weeks. Significantly more of the group
on citalopram showed improvement compared with placebo on the
depression rating scale (CDRS-R). A significantly increased response rate
(response defined as less than 28 on CDRS-R) of 35 percent occurred in the
citalopram group, compared with 24 percent of the placebo group. Common
side effects that emerged included headache, nausea, insomnia, rhinitis,
abdominal pain, dizziness, fatigue, and flu-like symptoms.
RCTs to date that have not shown efficacy on primary outcome measures
include those using mirtazapine and tricyclic antidepressants. A metaanalysis of SSRI trials in depressed children and adolescents found the
efficacy of SSRIs compared to placebo with an average response rate of 60




<<<PAGE 692>>>

review of pharmacologic and complementary-alternative medicine
treatments. J Dev Behav Pediatr. 2011;32:56–68.
Kasari C, Lawton K. New directions in behavioral treatment of autism
spectrum disorders. Curr Opin Neurol. 2010;23:137–143.
Ke JY, Chen CL, Chen YJ, Chen CH, Lee LF, Chiang TM. Features of
developmental functions and autistic profiles in children with fragile X
syndrome. Chang Gung Med J. 2005;28:551.
Koyama T, Tachimori H, Osada H, Kurita H. Cognitive and symptom
profiles in high-functioning pervasive developmental disorder not
otherwise specified and attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. J Autism
Dev Disord. 2006;36(3):373–380.
Lehmkuhl, HD, Storch E, Bodfish JW, Geffken GR. Brief Report: exposure
and response prevention for obsessive compulsive disorder in a 12-yearold with autism. J Autism Dev Disord. 2008;38:977–981.
Mandell DS, Novak MM, Zubritsky CD. Factors associated with age of
diagnosis among children with autism spectrum disorders. Pediatrics.
2005;116:1480.
Miano S, Ferri R. Epidemiology and management of insomnia in children
with autistic spectrum disorders. Pediatr Drugs. 2010;12:75–84.
Nazeer A. Psychopharmacology of autistic spectrum disorders in children
and adolescents. Pediatr Clin N Am. 2011;58:85–97.
Owley T, Walton L, Salt J, Guter SJ, Winnega M, Leventhal BL, Cook EH.
An open–label trial of escitalopram in pervasive developmental disorders.
J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2005;44:343.
Research Units on Pediatric Psychopharmacology Autism Network.
Randomized, controlled crossover trial of methylphenidate in pervasive
developmental disorders with hyperactivity. Arch Gen Psychiatry.
2005;62:1266–1274.
Research Units on Pediatric Psychopharmacology Autism Network.
Risperidone treatment of autistic disorder: longer-term benefits and blinded
discontinuation after 6 months. Am J Psychiatry. 2005;162:1361–1369.
Robinson EB, Koenen KC, McCormick MC, Munir K, Hallet V, Happe F,
Plomin R, Ronald A. Evidence that autistic traits show the same etiology
in the general population an at the quantitative extremes (5 percent, 2.5
percent, and 1 percent). Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2011;68:1113–1121.
Rogers SJ, Vismara LA. Evidence-based comprehensive treatments for early




<<<PAGE 1247>>>

Maintenance

6–24 mo Return to full
or
function and
longer
quality of life
Prevention of
recurrence

Continue
psychoeducation
Rehabilitate
Manage
comorbidities
Monitor for
recurrence

Modified from Lam RW, McIntosh D, Wang J, Enns MW, Kolivakis T, Michalak EE, Sareen J,
Song WY, Kennedy SH, MacQueen GM, Milev RV, Parikh SV, Ravindran AV; CANMAT
Depression Work Group. Canadian Network for Mood and Anxiety Treatments (CANMAT)
2016 clinical guidelines for the management of adults with major depressive disorder: section
1. Disease burden and principles of care. Can J Psychiatry. 2016;61(9):510–523.

Table 7-11
SSRI and SNRI Antidepressant Medications and Their Side
Effect Profiles
Side Effect Frequency
Drug Class

Recommended 10–30%
Dose Range
(mg)

>30%

SSRI
Citalopram

20–40

Nausea, dry mouth, None
sweating

Escitalopram

10–20

Male sexual
dysfunction and
nausea

Fluoxetine

20–60

Nausea, dry mouth, None
somnolence,
nervousness,
anxiety,
insomnia,
tremor, anorexia

Fluvoxamine

100–300

Dry mouth,

None

Nausea




<<<PAGE 1324>>>

Klein DF. Historical aspects of anxiety. Dialogues Clin Neurosci.
2002;4(3):295–304.
Lovibond PF, Lovibond SH. The structure of negative emotional states:
comparison of the Depression Anxiety Stress Scales (DASS) with the Beck
Depression and Anxiety Inventories. Behav Res Ther. 1995;33(3):335–
343.
Marteau TM, Bekker H. The development of a six-item short-form of the
state scale of the Spielberger State-Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI). Br J
Clin Psychol. 1992;31(3):301–306.
McLean CP, Asnaani A, Litz BT, Hofmann SG. Gender differences in
anxiety disorders: Prevalence, course of illness, comorbidity and burden of
illness. J Psychiatr Res. 2011;45:1027–1035.
Meyerbroker K, Morina N, Kerkhof G, Emmelkamp PM. Virtual reality
exposure treatment of agoraphobia: A comparison of computer automatic
virtual environment and head-mounted display. Stud Health Technol
Inform. 2011;167:51–56.
Naragon-Gainey K, Gallagher MW, Brown TA. A longitudinal examination
of psychosocial impairment across the anxiety disorders. Psycholog Med.
2013;43:1475.
Perna G, Daccò S, Menotti R, Caldirola D. Antianxiety medications for the
treatment of complex agoraphobia: Pharmacological interventions for a
behavioral condition. Neuropsychiatr Dis Treat. 2011;7:621–637.
Practice Guideline for the Treatment of Patients With Panic Disorder. In:
APA Practice Guidelines for the Treatment of Psychiatric Disorders:
Comprehensive Guidelines and Guideline Watches [Internet]. 1st ed.
Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Association; 2006 [cited July 26,
2020]. Available from: http://www.psychiatryonline.com/content.aspx?
aID=51396
Sanchez C, Reines EH, Montgomery SA. A comparative review of
escitalopram, paroxetine, and sertraline: Are they all alike? Int Clin
Psychopharmacol. 2014;29(4):185–196.
Shear MK, Vander Bilt J, Rucci P, Endicott J, Lydiard B, Otto MW, Pollack
MH, Chandler L, Williams J, Ali A, Frank DM. Reliability and validity of
a structured interview guide for the Hamilton Anxiety Rating Scale (SIGHA). Depress Anxiety. 2001;13(4):166–178.
Spitzer RL, Kroenke K, Williams JBW, Löwe B. A brief measure for




<<<PAGE 1523>>>

antidepressants that may be helpful include other SSRIs (although concerns
about prolonged QT intervals with higher doses limit the utility of citalopram
in this population), TCAs (particularly amitriptyline and desipramine),
trazodone, and monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs). Bupropion is
contraindicated due to an increased risk of seizure in this population. In
general, most of the antidepressants other than fluoxetine have been effective
at dosages usually given in the treatment of depressive disorders. Medication
is helpful in patients with comorbid depressive disorders and bulimia
nervosa. Topiramate may have some efficacy in reducing binge episodes in
bulimia nervosa, as may lisdexamfetamine. Evidence indicates that CBT and
medications (particularly fluoxetine) are the most effective combination.
Treatment of Binge-Eating Disorder
Psychotherapy. CBT is the most effective psychological treatment for
binge-eating disorder and should be considered a first-line treatment. CBT
can lead to decreases in binge eating and associated problems (e.g.,
depression); however, studies have not shown marked weight loss as a result
of CBT. CBT combined with psychopharmacological treatments such as
SSRIs shows better results than CBT alone. Exercise has also shown a
reduction in binge eating when combined with CBT. Interpersonal
psychotherapy (IPT) is also effective in the treatment of binge-eating
disorder; however, therapy focuses more on the interpersonal problems that
contribute to the disorder rather than disturbances in eating behavior. There is
also some evidence for the use of dialectical behavior therapy for bingeeating disorder.
Psychopharmacotherapy. Symptoms of binge eating may benefit from
medication treatment, with strong evidence supporting the use of
lisdexamfetamine for both weight loss and reduction of binge episodes.
Antidepressant medications have demonstrated improvement in binge eating,
but typically do not result in sustained weight loss; these include fluoxetine,
fluvoxamine, citalopram, escitalopram, sertraline, duloxetine, and bupropion.
The anticonvulsants topiramate and zonisamide may improve binge-eating
disorder, particularly with moderate weight loss. Topiramate may also reduce
binge episodes.




<<<PAGE 1772>>>

correct diagnosis. With a likelihood of subcortical seizure-like activity,
medications that lower the seizure threshold can aggravate the situation.
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), trazodone, and buspirone are
useful in reducing impulsivity and aggression. Propranolol and other βadrenergic receptor antagonists and calcium channel inhibitors have also been
effective in some cases.
Some neurosurgeons have performed operative treatments for intractable
violence and aggression. No evidence indicates that such treatment is
effective.
Kleptomania
Because true kleptomania is rare, reports of treatment tend to be individual
case descriptions or a short series of cases. Insight-oriented psychotherapy
and psychoanalysis have been successful but depend on patients’
motivations. Those who feel guilt and shame may be helped by insightoriented psychotherapy because of their increased motivation to change their
behavior.
Case reports and case series suggest that cognitive-behavioral therapy may
be helpful. Specific behavior therapies, including systematic desensitization,
aversive conditioning, and a combination of aversive conditioning and altered
social contingencies, have been reported successful, even when motivation
was lacking. SSRIs, such as fluoxetine and fluvoxamine, appear to be
effective in some patients with kleptomania; however, there are also reports
of fluoxetine having no benefit in kleptomania. Case reports indicated
successful treatment with tricyclic drugs, trazodone, lithium, valproate,
topiramate, naltrexone, methylphenidate, and electroconvulsive therapy. In a
controlled trial of antidepressants, escitalopram was found to have no benefit
in treating kleptomania. Though limited by small sample size and open-label
design, high-dose naltrexone was reported to be effective in reducing the urge
to steal in patients with kleptomania.
Pyromania
Little has been written about the treatment of pyromania, and treating
firesetters has been difficult because of their lack of motivation. No single
treatment has been proved effective; as a result, most therapists try various




<<<PAGE 1776>>>

Dannon PN. Topiramate for the treatment of kleptomania: a case series and
review of the literature. Clin Neuropharmacol. 2003;26:1.
Grant JE, Kim SW. An open-label study of naltrexone in the treatment of
kleptomania. J Clin Psychiatry. 2002;63:349–356.
Grant JE, Potenza MN. Impulse control disorders: clinical characteristics and
pharmacological management. Ann Clin Psychiatry. 2004;16:27–34.
Greenberg HR. Impulse-control disorders not elsewhere classified. In:
Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook
of Psychiatry. 8th ed. Vol. 1. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins; 2005:2035.
Hassamal S, Ramesh D, Moeller FG. Chapter 24: Impulse control disorders:
pyromania. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s
Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Wolters
Kluwer; 2017:2113–2114.
Hassamal S, Ramesh D, Moeller FG. Chapter 24: Impulse control disorders:
kleptomania. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s
Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Wolters
Kluwer; 2017:2114–2115.
Hollander E, Baker BR, Kahn J, Stein DJ. Conceptualizing and assessing
impulse-control disorders. In: Hollander E, Stein DJ, eds. Clinical Manual
of Impulse-Control Disorders. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric
Publishing; 2006:1–18.
Koran LM, Aboujaoude EN, Gamel NN. Escitalopram treatment of
kleptomania: an open-label trial followed by double-blind discontinuation.
J Clin Psychiatry. 2007;68:422–427.
Kuzma JM, Black DW. Disorders characterized by poor impulse control. Ann
Clin Psychiatry. 2005;17:219–226.
Lyke J. A psychiatric perspective on the variety of impulsive behaviors.
PsycCRITIQUES. 2006;51(12).
Mandy W, Skuse D, Steer C, St Pourcain B, Oliver BR. Oppositionality and
socioemotional competence: interacting risk factors in the development of
childhood conduct disorder symptoms. J Am Acad Child Adolesc
Psychiatry. 2013;52(7):718–727.
Olson SL, Sameroff AJ, Lansford JE, Sexton H, Davis-Kean P, Bates JE,
Pettit GS, Dodge KA. Deconstructing the externalizing spectrum: growth
patterns of overt aggression, covert aggression, oppositional behavior,




<<<PAGE 1974>>>

21.2 Antidepressants
SELECTIVE SEROTONIN REUPTAKE INHIBITORS
Fluoxetine (Prozac), the first SSRI marketed in the United States, rapidly
captured the favor of both clinicians and the general public as reports
emerged of dramatic patient responses to treatment of depression. Patients no
longer experienced such side effects as dry mouth, constipation, sedation,
orthostatic hypotension, and tachycardia, typical side effects associated with
the earlier antidepressant drugs—the TCAs and MAOIs. It was also
significantly safer when taken in overdose than any previously available
antidepressant. A significant effect of fluoxetine’s popularity was that it
helped ameliorate the long-standing stigma of depression and its treatment.
Table 21-15
Currently Approved Indications of the Selective Serotonin
Reuptake Inhibitors in the United States for Adult and
Pediatric Populations

Other SSRIs followed fluoxetine. These include sertraline (Zoloft),
paroxetine (Paxil), fluvoxamine (Luvox), citalopram (Celexa), escitalopram
(Lexapro), and vilazodone (Viibryd). These drugs are all equally effective in




<<<PAGE 1975>>>

treating depression. However, some are approved by the U.S. FDA for
multiple indications, such as major depression, OCD, PTSD, PMDD, panic
disorder, and social phobia (social anxiety disorder) (Table 21-15). Note that
fluvoxamine is not FDA approved as an antidepressant, a fact that is due to a
marketing decision. It is considered an antidepressant in other countries.
Although all SSRIs are equally effective, there are meaningful differences
in pharmacodynamics, pharmacokinetics, and side effects, differences that
might affect clinical responses among individual patients. This would explain
why some patients have better clinical responses to a particular SSRI than
another. The SSRIs have proven more problematic in terms of some side
effects than the original clinical trials suggested. Quality-of-life–associated
adverse effects such as nausea, sexual dysfunction, and weight gain
sometimes mitigate the therapeutic benefits of the SSRIs. There can also be
distressing withdrawal symptoms when SSRIs are stopped abruptly. This
withdrawal is especially true with paroxetine but also occurs when other
SSRIs with short half-lives are stopped.
Pharmacologic Actions
Pharmacokinetics. A significant difference among the SSRIs is their
broad range of serum half-lives. Fluoxetine has the most prolonged half-life:
4 to 6 days; its active metabolite has a half-life of 7 to 9 days. The half-life of
sertraline is 26 hours, and its less active metabolite has a half-life of 3 to 5
days. The half-lives of the other three, which do not have metabolites with
significant pharmacologic activity, are 35 hours for citalopram, 27 to 32
hours for escitalopram, 21 hours for paroxetine, and 15 hours for
fluvoxamine. As a rule, the SSRIs are well absorbed after oral administration
and have their peak effects in the range of 3 to 8 hours. Absorption of
sertraline may be slightly enhanced by food.
There are also differences in plasma protein–binding percentages among
the SSRIs, with sertraline, fluoxetine, and paroxetine being the most highly
bound and escitalopram being the least bound.
All SSRIs are metabolized in the liver by the CYP450 enzymes. Because
the SSRIs have such a broad therapeutic index, other drugs rarely produce
problematic increases in SSRI concentrations. The most critical drug–drug
interactions involving the SSRIs occur as a result of the SSRIs inhibiting the




<<<PAGE 1976>>>

metabolism of the coadministered medication. Each of the SSRIs possesses a
potential for slowing or blocking the metabolism of many drugs (Table 2116). Fluvoxamine is the most problematic of the drugs in this respect. It has a
marked effect on several of the CYP enzymes. Examples of clinically
significant interactions include fluvoxamine and theophylline (Slo-Bid, TheoDur) through CYP1A2 interaction, fluvoxamine and clozapine (Clozaril)
through CYP1A2 inhibition; and fluvoxamine with alprazolam (Xanax) or
clonazepam (Klonopin) through CYP3A4 inhibition. Fluoxetine and
paroxetine also possess significant effects on the CYP2D6 isozyme, which
may interfere with the efficacy of opiate analogs, such as codeine and
hydrocodone, by blocking the conversion of these agents to their active form.
Thus, coadministration of fluoxetine and paroxetine with an opiate interferes
with its analgesic effects. Sertraline, citalopram, and escitalopram are least
likely to complicate treatment because of interactions.
The pharmacokinetics of vilazodone (5 to 80 mg) is dose-proportional.
Steady-state plasma levels are achieved in about 3 days. The elimination of
vilazodone is primarily by hepatic metabolism with a terminal half-life of
approximately 25 hours.
Pharmacodynamics. The SSRIs are believed to exert their therapeutic
effects through serotonin reuptake inhibition. They derive their name because
they have little effect on the reuptake of norepinephrine or dopamine. Often,
adequate clinical activity and saturation of the 5-HT transporters are achieved
at starting dosages. As a rule, higher dosages do not increase antidepressant
efficacy but may increase the risk of adverse effects.
Table 21-16
CYP450 Inhibitory Potential of Commonly Prescribed
Antidepressants




<<<PAGE 1977>>>

Citalopram and escitalopram are the most selective inhibitors of serotonin
reuptake, with very little inhibition of norepinephrine or dopamine reuptake
and very low affinities for histamine H1, GABA, or benzodiazepine
receptors. The other SSRIs have a similar profile except that fluoxetine
weakly inhibits norepinephrine reuptake and binds to 5-HT2C receptors,
sertraline weakly inhibits norepinephrine and dopamine reuptake, and
paroxetine has significant anticholinergic activity at higher dosages and binds
to nitric oxide synthase. The SSRI vilazodone has 5-HT1A receptor agonist
properties. The clinical implications of the 5-HT1A receptor agonist effects
are not yet evident.
A pharmacodynamic interaction appears to underlie the antidepressant
effects of combined fluoxetine–olanzapine. When taken together, these drugs
increase brain concentrations of norepinephrine. Concomitant use of SSRIs
and drugs in the triptan class (sumatriptan [Imitrex], naratriptan [Amerge],
rizatriptan [Maxalt], and zolmitriptan [Zomig]) may result in a severe
pharmacodynamic interaction—the development of serotonin syndrome (see
“Precautions and Adverse Reactions”). However, many people use triptans
while taking low doses of an SSRI for headache prophylaxis without adverse
reaction. A similar reaction may occur when SSRIs are combined with
tramadol (Ultram).
Therapeutic Indications
Depression. In the United States, all SSRIs other than fluvoxamine have
been approved by the FDA for the treatment of depression. Several studies




<<<PAGE 1980>>>

may be at a slight risk of developing pulmonary hypertension. Data about the
risk of this side effect are inconclusive, but it is estimated to involve 1 to 2
babies for 1,000 births. Paroxetine should be avoided during pregnancy.
The FDA classified paroxetine as a pregnancy Category D medication in
the former FDA classification system. In 2005, the FDA issued an alert that
paroxetine increases the risk of congenital disabilities, particularly heart
defects, when women take it during the first 3 months of pregnancy.
Paroxetine should usually not be taken during pregnancy, but for some
women who have already been taking paroxetine, the benefits of continuing
paroxetine may be greater than the potential risk to the baby. Women taking
paroxetine who are pregnant, think they may be pregnant, or plan to become
pregnant should talk to their physicians about the potential risks of taking
paroxetine during pregnancy.
The FDA alert was based on the findings of studies that showed that
women who took paroxetine during the first 3 months of pregnancy were
about one-and-a-half to two times as likely to have a baby with a heart defect
as women who received other antidepressants or women in the general
population. Most of the heart defects in these studies were not lifethreatening and happened mainly in the inside walls of the heart muscle,
where repairs can be made if needed (atrial and ventricular septal defects).
Sometimes these septal defects resolve without treatment. In one of the
studies, the risk of heart defects in babies whose mothers had taken
paroxetine early in pregnancy was 2 percent, compared with a 1 percent risk
in the whole population. In the other study, the risk of heart defects in babies
whose mothers had taken paroxetine in the first 3 months of pregnancy was
1.5 percent, compared with 1 percent in babies whose mothers had taken
other antidepressants in the first 3 months of pregnancy. This study also
showed that women who took paroxetine in the first 3 months of pregnancy
were about twice as likely to have a baby with any congenital disability as
women who took other antidepressants.
Minimal amounts of SSRIs are found in breast milk, and no harmful
effects have been found in breastfed babies. Concentrations of sertraline and
escitalopram are exceptionally low in breast milk. However, in some cases,
reported concentrations might be higher than average. No decision regarding
the use of an SSRI is risk-free. It is thus essential to document that
communication of potential risks to the patient has taken place.




<<<PAGE 1988>>>

only one percentage point higher than the placebo rate. Fluoxetine is the most
likely to cause headaches. On the other hand, all SSRIs are effective
prophylaxis against both migraine and tension-type headaches in many
persons.
Central Nervous System Adverse Effects
ANXIETY. Fluoxetine may cause anxiety, particularly in the first few weeks of
treatment. However, these initial effects usually give way to an overall
reduction in anxiety after a few weeks. Increased anxiety is caused
considerably less frequently by paroxetine and escitalopram, which may be
better choices if sedation is desired, as in mixed anxiety and depressive
disorders.
The primary effect SSRIs exert in the area of
insomnia and sedation is improved sleep resulting from the treatment of
depression and anxiety. However, as many as 25 percent of persons taking
SSRIs note trouble sleeping, excessive somnolence, or overwhelming fatigue.
Fluoxetine is the most likely to cause insomnia, for which reason it is often
taken in the morning. Sertraline and fluvoxamine are about equally likely to
cause insomnia as somnolence, and citalopram and especially paroxetine
often cause somnolence. Escitalopram is more likely to interfere with sleep
than its isomer, citalopram. Some persons benefit from taking their SSRI
dose before going to bed, but others prefer to take it the morning. SSRIinduced insomnia can be treated with benzodiazepines, trazodone (Desyrel)
(clinicians must explain the risk of priapism), or other sedating medicines.
Significant SSRI-induced somnolence often requires switching to the use of
another SSRI or bupropion.
INSOMNIA AND SEDATION.

OTHER SLEEP EFFECTS. Many persons taking SSRIs report recalling extremely

vivid dreams or nightmares. They describe sleep as “busy.” Other sleep
effects of the SSRIs include bruxism, restless legs, nocturnal myoclonus, and
sweating.
Emotional blunting is a largely overlooked but
frequent side effect associated with chronic SSRI use. Patients report an
EMOTIONAL BLUNTING.




<<<PAGE 1993>>>

CYP2D6 enzyme. Cimetidine can increase the concentration of sertraline and
paroxetine, and phenobarbital (Luminal) and phenytoin can decrease the
concentration of paroxetine. Because of the potential for interference with the
CYP2D6 enzyme, the coadministration of paroxetine with other
antidepressants, phenothiazines, and antiarrhythmic drugs should be
undertaken with caution. Paroxetine may increase the anticoagulant effect of
warfarin. Coadministration of paroxetine and tramadol may precipitate
serotonin syndrome in elderly persons.
Fluvoxamine. Among the SSRIs, fluvoxamine appears to present the most
risk for drug–drug interactions. Fluvoxamine is metabolized by the enzyme
CYP3A4, which may be inhibited by ketoconazole (Nizoral). Fluvoxamine
may increase the half-life of alprazolam, triazolam (Halcion), and diazepam,
and it should not be coadministered with these agents. Fluvoxamine may
increase theophylline levels threefold and warfarin levels twofold, with
significant clinical consequences; thus, the serum levels of the latter drugs
should be closely monitored, and the doses adjusted accordingly.
Fluvoxamine raises concentrations and may increase the activity of clozapine,
carbamazepine, methadone (Dolophine, Methadose), propranolol (Inderal),
and diltiazem (Cardizem). Fluvoxamine has no significant interactions with
lorazepam (Ativan) or digoxin (Lanoxin).
Citalopram. Citalopram is not a potent inhibitor of any CYP enzymes.
Concurrent administration of cimetidine increases concentrations of
citalopram by about 40 percent. Citalopram does not significantly affect the
metabolism of, nor is its metabolism significantly affected by, digoxin,
lithium, warfarin, carbamazepine, or imipramine (Tofranil). Citalopram
increases the plasma concentrations of metoprolol (Lopressor) twofold, but
this usually does not affect BP or heart rate. Data on coadministration of
citalopram and potent inhibitors of CYP3A4 or CYP2D6 are not available.
Escitalopram. Escitalopram is a moderate inhibitor of CYP2D6 and has
been shown to raise desipramine (Norpramin) and metoprolol concentrations
significantly.
Vilazodone. Vilazodone dose should be reduced to 20 mg when




<<<PAGE 1996>>>

swallowed with food without chewing the tablet. Abrupt discontinuation of
fluvoxamine may cause a discontinuation syndrome owing to its short halflife.
Citalopram. Citalopram is available in 20- and 40-mg scored tablets and as
a liquid (10 mg/5 mL). The usual starting dosage is 20 mg a day for the first
week, after which it usually is increased to 40 mg a day. For elderly persons
or persons with hepatic impairment, 20 mg a day is recommended. Tablets
should be taken once daily in either the morning or the evening with or
without food.
Escitalopram. Escitalopram is available as 10- and 20-mg scored tablets, as
well as an oral solution at a concentration of 5 mg/5 mL. The recommended
dosage of escitalopram is 10 mg/day. In clinical trials, no additional benefit
was noted when 20 mg/day was used.
Vilazodone. Vilazodone is available as 10-, 20-, and 40-mg tablets. The
recommended therapeutic dose of vilazodone is 40 mg once daily. Treatment
should be titrated, starting with an initial dose of 10 mg once daily for 7 days,
followed by 20 mg once daily for an additional 7 days, and then an increase
to 40 mg once daily. Vilazodone should be taken with food. If vilazodone is
taken without food, inadequate drug concentrations may result, and the
drug’s effectiveness may be diminished. Vilazodone is not approved for use
in children. The safety and efficacy of vilazodone in pediatric patients have
not been studied. The patient’s age should not influence the dose, nor does
mild or moderate hepatic impairment. Vilazodone has not been studied in
patients with severe hepatic impairment. No dose adjustment is
recommended in patients with mild, moderate, or severe renal impairment.
Pregnancy and Breastfeeding. Except for paroxetine, the SSRIs are safe
to take during pregnancy when deemed necessary for the treatment of the
mother. There are no controlled human data regarding vilazodone use during
pregnancy, nor are there human data regarding drug concentrations in breast
milk. Transient QTc prolongation has been noted in newborns whose mother
was being treated with an SSRI during pregnancy.




<<<PAGE 2256>>>

overview of the results of basic and clinical research. Int J
Neuropsychopharmacol. 2000;3:149–165.
Bech P, Allerup P, Larsen E, Csillag C, Licht R. Escitalopram versus
nortriptyline: how to let the clinical GENDEP data tell us what they
contained. Acta Psychiatr Scand. 2013;127(4):328–329.
Cettomai D, McArthur JC. Mirtazapine use in human immunodeficiency
virus-infected patients with progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy.
Arch Neurol. 2009;66(2):255–258.
Chambers CD, Hernandez-Diaz S, Van Marter LJ, Werler MM, Louik C.
Selective serotonin-reuptake inhibitors and risk of persistent pulmonary
hypertension of the newborn. N Engl J Med. 2006;354:579–587.
Charney DS, Delgado PL, Price LH, Heninger GR. The receptor sensitivity
hypothesis of antidepressant action: a review of antidepressant effects on
serotonin function. In: Brown SL, van Praag HM, eds. The Role of
Serotonin in Psychiatric Disorders. New York: Brunner/Mazel; 1991:29.
Choung RS, Cremonini F, Thapa P, Zinsmeister AR, Talley NJ. The effect of
short-term, low-dose tricyclic and tetracyclic antidepressant treatment on
satiation, postnutrient load gastrointestinal symptoms and gastric
emptying: a double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled trial.
Neurogastroenterol Motil. 2008;20:220–227.
Cipriani A, Barbui C, Brambilla P, Furukawa TA, Hotopf M. Are all
antidepressants really the same? The case of fluoxetine: a systematic
review. J Clin Psychiatry. 2006;67:850–864.
Cipriani A, Furukawa TA, Salanti G, Geddes JR, Higgins JPT. Comparative
efficacy and acceptability of 12 new-generation antidepressants: a
multiple-treatments meta-analysis. Lancet. 2009;373:746–758.
Ciraulo DA, Knapp C, Rotrosen J, Sarid-Segal O, Seliger C. Nefazodone
treatment of cocaine dependence with comorbid depressive symptoms.
Addiction. 2005;
100(Suppl 1):23–31.
Clayton A, Kornstein S, Prakash A, Mallinckrodt C, Wohlreich M. Changes
in sexual functioning associated with duloxetine, escitalopram, and
placebo in the treatment of patients with major depressive disorder. J Sex
Med. 2007;4:917–929.
Clayton AH, Montejo AL. Major depressive disorder, antidepressants, and
sexual dysfunction. J Clin Psychiatry. 2006;67(Suppl 6):33.




<<<PAGE 2260>>>

Kim SW, Shin IS, Kim JM, Park KH, Youn T, Yoon JS. Factors potentiating
the risk of mirtazapine-associated restless legs syndrome. Hum
Psychopharmocol. 2008;(7):615–620.
Kocsis JH, Leon AC, Markowitz JC, Manber R, Arnow B, Klein DN, Thase
ME. Patient preference as a moderator of outcome for chronic forms of
major depressive disorder treated with nefazodone, cognitive behavioral
analysis system of psychotherapy, or their combination. J Clin Psychiatry.
2009;70(3):354–361.
Koibuchi N. The role of thyroid hormone on functional organization in the
cerebellum. Cerebellum. 2013;12(3):304–306.
Kostrubsky SE, Strom SC, Kalgutkar AS, Kulkarni S, Atherton J. Inhibition
of hepatobiliary transport as a predictive method for clinical hepatotoxicity
of nefazodone. Toxicol Sci. 2006;90(2):451–459.
Lai MW, Klein-Schwartz W, Rodgers GC, Abrams JY, Haber DA. 2005
Annual report of the American Association of Poison Control Centers’
national poisoning and exposure database. Clin Toxicol. 2006;44:803–932.
Lam RW, Andersen HF, Wade AG. Escitalopram and duloxetine in the
treatment of major depressive disorder: a pooled analysis of two trials. Int
Clin Psychopharmacol. 2008;23(4):181.
Lapierre YD. A review of trimipramine: 30 years of clinical use. Drugs.
1989;38(Suppl 1):
17–24.
Lieberman DZ, Montgomery SA, Tourian KA, Brisard C, Rosas G. A pooled
analysis of two placebo-controlled trials of desvenlafaxine in major
depressive disorder. Int Clin Psychopharmacol. 2008;23:188–197.
Liebowitz MR, Manley AL, Padmanabhan SK, Ganguly R, Tummala R.
Efficacy, safety, and tolerability of desvenlafaxine 50 mg/day and 100
mg/day in outpatients with major depressive disorder. Curr Med Res Opin.
2008;24:1877–1890.
Liebowitz MR, Quitkin FM, Stewart JW. Antidepressant specificity in
atypical depression. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 1988;45:129–137.
Lojko D, Rybakowski JK. L-Thyroxine augmentation of serotonergic
antidepressants in female patients with refractory depression. J Affect
Disord. 2007;103(1–3):
253–256.
Looper KL. Potential medical and surgical complications of serotonergic




<<<PAGE 3651>>>

treatment, 484
Environmental toxins, 63
Ephrins, 949
Epidemiologic Catchment Area (ECA) study, 371
Epidermal growth factor (EGF), 943
Epigenetic principle, 1073–1076
Freudian theory, 1073
life cycle, stages of, 1073–1076
Epilepsy, 249–253
classification, 249–250, 250t
definitions, 249
diagnosis, 252
generalized seizures, 250–251, 250f
partial seizures, 251
seizure in, 249
symptoms
ictal, 251
interictal, 251
mood disorder symptoms, 252
preictal, 251
psychotic, 251–252
violence, 252
treatment, 253, 253t
Epinephrine, 622, 955–956
Episodic memory, 1028
Equilibration, 1010
ErbB4 gene disruption of, 997
ErbB2-4 protein, 949
Erikson, Erik, 849, 899, 909, 917, 918t, 1071–1073
on integrity, 1036
on mental health, 1035
Erikson’s psychosocial stages, 1073t
Eros, 1061
Erythroxylum coca, 303
Escitalopram, 631, 632
Eskalith. See Lithium
Esketamine, 648


