<<<PAGE 633>>>

the treatment of anxiety disorders in children and adolescents.
A large, multisite investigation by the NIMH (Research Units in Pediatric
Psychopharmacology [RUPP]) confirmed the safety and efficacy of
fluvoxamine in the treatment of childhood separation anxiety disorder,
generalized anxiety disorder, and social anxiety disorder. This double-blind,
placebo-controlled study of 128 children and adolescents revealed that 76
percent of children in the group treated with fluvoxamine showed significant
improvement compared with 29 percent of those in the placebo group.
Response to medication was noticeable after only 2 weeks of treatment.
Fluvoxamine dosages ranged from 50 to 250 mg/day in children and up to
300 mg/day in adolescents. Children and adolescents with less comorbid
depressive symptoms had the best response. Youths who responded
continued fluvoxamine for 6 months, and almost all of them continued to be
responders at the 6-month mark.
Several other randomized clinical trials have also supported the efficacy of
SSRIs in the treatment of child and adolescent anxiety disorders. A
randomized, controlled trial found fluoxetine, at a dose of 20 mg/day, to be
safe and effective for children with these disorders, with minor side effects
including gastrointestinal distress, headache, and drowsiness. Also, a
randomized clinical trial for the treatment of generalized anxiety disorder in
children lends support for the efficacy of sertraline. Finally, a large industry
randomized clinical trial of paroxetine in the treatment of children with social
anxiety disorder found that paroxetine was associated with a response in 78
percent of children treated. The dose of paroxetine was 10 to 50 mg/day.
The FDA has placed a “black box” warning on antidepressants, including
all of the SSRI agents, used in the treatment of any childhood disorder,
because of concerns about increased suicidality; however, no individual
childhood anxiety study has found a statistically significant increase in
suicidal thoughts or behaviors.
Currently, we do not recommend using tricyclic drugs due to their
potentially serious cardiac adverse effects. Other agents, including buspirone
and β-adrenergic receptor antagonists such as propranolol, have been used
clinically in children with anxiety disorders, but currently, no data support
their efficacy. Diphenhydramine may be used in the short term to control
sleep disturbances in children with anxiety disorders. Open trials and one
double-blind, placebo-controlled study suggested that alprazolam, a




<<<PAGE 963>>>

with the benzodiazepines. Table 4-24 lists the equivalent therapeutic doses of
benzodiazepines. Even when users take grossly excessive amounts (more
than 2 g) in suicide attempts, the symptoms include only drowsiness,
lethargy, ataxia, some confusion, and mild depression of the user’s vital
signs. The most lethal overdoses occur when the user takes a benzodiazepine
in combination with other sedatives, such as alcohol. In such cases, small
doses of benzodiazepines can cause death. The availability of flumazenil, a
specific benzodiazepine antagonist, has reduced the lethality of the
benzodiazepines. Flumazenil can be used in emergency departments to
reverse the effects of benzodiazepines.
Table 4-24
Approximate
Therapeutic
Benzodiazepines

Equivalent

Doses

Generic Name

Trade Name

Dose (mg)

Alprazolam

Xanax

1

Chlordiazepoxide

Librium

25

Clonazepam

Klonopin

0.5–1.0

Clorazepate

Tranxene

15

Diazepam

Valium

10

Estazolam

Prosom

1

Flurazepam

Dalmane

30

Lorazepam

Ativan

2

Oxazepam

Serax

30

Temazepam

Restoril

20

Triazolam

Halcion

0.25

Quazepam

Doral

15

Zolpidem

Ambien

10

of




<<<PAGE 1910>>>

underdosing than in overshooting the recommended dose range.
The time of dosing is usually based on the plasma half-life of a drug and its
side effect profile. Sedating drugs are given all at night or with
disproportionate daily doses at night. The opposite is true with activating
drugs. The frequency of dosing is not as straightforward as with sedating
drugs. Most dosing regimens of psychotropic drugs, such as once-a-day
versus divided doses, are based on measurements of plasma concentrations
rather than receptor occupancy in the brain. Evidence suggests a significant
dissociation exists between the brain and plasma kinetics. Reliance on plasma
kinetics as the basis for dosing regimens leads to a misunderstanding of
necessary schedules.
As a rule, psychotropic drugs should be used continuously. There are some
possible exceptions, such as when treating insomnia, agitation, or situational
anxiety. A common mistake is the use of high-potency benzodiazepines, such
as alprazolam (Xanax) and clonazepam (Klonopin), only after an attack has
begun. These drugs should be used as part of a regular schedule to prevent
attacks.
Some patients who experience sexual dysfunction while being treated with
SSRIs take a drug holiday; that is, they skip a daily dose from time to time to
facilitate sexual performance.
Intermittent dosing regimens of SSRIs are effective as a treatment for
premenstrual dysphoric disorder (PMDD). The drugs are taken daily during
the 2-week luteal phase of the menstrual cycle.
Duration of Treatment
A common question from a patient is, “How long do I need to take the
medication?” The answer depends on multiple variables. These include the
specific disorder, the symptom duration, and family history. We should also
consider the patient’s tolerance of and benefit from the medication. Patients
can be given a reasonable explanation of the probabilities but should be told
that it is first best to see if the medication works for them and whether any
side effects are acceptable. Any more definitive discussion of treatment
duration can be held once we can assess the degree of success. Even patients
with a philosophical aversion to the use of psychotropic drugs may elect to
stay on the medication indefinitely if the magnitude of improvement is




<<<PAGE 1915>>>

Sensitization
Clinically manifested as the reverse of tolerance, sensitization is said to occur
when sensitivity to a drug effect increases over time. In these cases, the same
dose typically produces more pronounced effects as treatment progresses.
Withdrawal
The development of physiologic adaptation to a drug, with a subsequent risk
of withdrawal symptoms, has been reported for many classes of psychotropic
drugs. Technically, withdrawal should be considered a side effect. The
probability and severity of these reactions are remote with most drugs and
more frequent with others. As a general rule, the more abruptly a drug is
stopped and the shorter its elimination half-life, the more likely it is that
clinically significant withdrawal symptoms will occur. When using some
short-acting drugs, withdrawal reactions can result from missed doses and
during daily intervals between doses. Gradual tapering of medications after
prolonged use is recommended whenever possible. Although this reduces the
risk of withdrawal reactions, it does not ensure they will not occur. The socalled sedative-hypnotics and opiates are the agents most often associated
with mentally and physically distressing discontinuation reactions. In some
cases, such as barbiturate use, withdrawal can be fatal.
Marked differences are found among agents, even within a given class,
concerning the probability and severity of discontinuation effects. For
example, the benzodiazepines alprazolam and triazolam (Halcion) commonly
produce more immediate and intense withdrawal symptoms than other
compounds. Among the SSRIs, there is a well-described withdrawal
syndrome that appears to be more frequent and severe with paroxetine
(Paxil). It can, however, occur with any SSRI. Even fluoxetine can be
associated with discontinuation symptoms, but the symptoms may be delayed
and attenuated because of the long elimination half-life of its active
metabolite. These manifestations are subtle and are delayed for weeks after
the last dose. Venlafaxine also produces severe SSRI-like withdrawal
syndrome.
In addition to half-life, many variables can influence the likelihood and
degree of discontinuation symptoms. Changes in the rate of drug metabolism,
as an example, can play a role. Paroxetine is primarily metabolized by the




<<<PAGE 1916>>>

cytochrome P450 (CYP) 2D6 isoenzyme. However, it is also a potent
inhibitor of CYP 2D6. This results in autoinhibition, dose-dependent
inhibition of its metabolism, with a subsequent increase in plasma
concentrations of paroxetine. If the dose of paroxetine is decreased or the
drug is stopped, the decline in its plasma concentrations can be steep, causing
withdrawal to occur. Withdrawal can occur in rare cases in which the dose of
a drug is not decreased, but a second agent, which had been inhibiting its
metabolism, was stopped. For example, alprazolam is metabolized via the
CYP 3A3/4 enzyme system. Nefazodone inhibits that enzyme. If a patient
taking both agents for several weeks discontinues the nefazodone, it could
result in a rapid increase in the rate of alprazolam metabolism and a
consequent drop in plasma concentrations.
The development of sustained-release versions of drugs, such as
alprazolam, paroxetine, and venlafaxine, has not reduced the severity of their
withdrawal reactions. The prolonged half-life of those agents results from
delayed absorption rather than prolongation of the elimination phase. The
frequency of drug dosing is reduced but not the rate of the falloff in plasma
concentrations.
Low bioavailability with a generic agent may account for the unexpected
loss of clinical effect in the emergence of withdrawal symptoms. The
occurrence of these events soon after refilling a prescription should prompt
examination of the new medication. It should be confirmed whether the
dispensed medication and dose are both correct. It is difficult to ascertain
whether generic medications are genuinely equivalent, so the possibility
exists that differences in potency may underlie adverse changes in clinical
status.
Withdrawal symptoms invariably occur hours or days after dose reduction
or discontinuation. Symptoms resolve within a few weeks, so the persistence
of symptoms argues against withdrawal. Although depletion studies have
been shown to provoke the rapid return of symptoms, in clinical practice,
psychotic and mood symptoms do not usually reappear abruptly after longterm treatment.

COMBINATION OF DRUGS
According to the American Psychiatric Association Practice Guidelines for




<<<PAGE 1976>>>

metabolism of the coadministered medication. Each of the SSRIs possesses a
potential for slowing or blocking the metabolism of many drugs (Table 2116). Fluvoxamine is the most problematic of the drugs in this respect. It has a
marked effect on several of the CYP enzymes. Examples of clinically
significant interactions include fluvoxamine and theophylline (Slo-Bid, TheoDur) through CYP1A2 interaction, fluvoxamine and clozapine (Clozaril)
through CYP1A2 inhibition; and fluvoxamine with alprazolam (Xanax) or
clonazepam (Klonopin) through CYP3A4 inhibition. Fluoxetine and
paroxetine also possess significant effects on the CYP2D6 isozyme, which
may interfere with the efficacy of opiate analogs, such as codeine and
hydrocodone, by blocking the conversion of these agents to their active form.
Thus, coadministration of fluoxetine and paroxetine with an opiate interferes
with its analgesic effects. Sertraline, citalopram, and escitalopram are least
likely to complicate treatment because of interactions.
The pharmacokinetics of vilazodone (5 to 80 mg) is dose-proportional.
Steady-state plasma levels are achieved in about 3 days. The elimination of
vilazodone is primarily by hepatic metabolism with a terminal half-life of
approximately 25 hours.
Pharmacodynamics. The SSRIs are believed to exert their therapeutic
effects through serotonin reuptake inhibition. They derive their name because
they have little effect on the reuptake of norepinephrine or dopamine. Often,
adequate clinical activity and saturation of the 5-HT transporters are achieved
at starting dosages. As a rule, higher dosages do not increase antidepressant
efficacy but may increase the risk of adverse effects.
Table 21-16
CYP450 Inhibitory Potential of Commonly Prescribed
Antidepressants




<<<PAGE 1993>>>

CYP2D6 enzyme. Cimetidine can increase the concentration of sertraline and
paroxetine, and phenobarbital (Luminal) and phenytoin can decrease the
concentration of paroxetine. Because of the potential for interference with the
CYP2D6 enzyme, the coadministration of paroxetine with other
antidepressants, phenothiazines, and antiarrhythmic drugs should be
undertaken with caution. Paroxetine may increase the anticoagulant effect of
warfarin. Coadministration of paroxetine and tramadol may precipitate
serotonin syndrome in elderly persons.
Fluvoxamine. Among the SSRIs, fluvoxamine appears to present the most
risk for drug–drug interactions. Fluvoxamine is metabolized by the enzyme
CYP3A4, which may be inhibited by ketoconazole (Nizoral). Fluvoxamine
may increase the half-life of alprazolam, triazolam (Halcion), and diazepam,
and it should not be coadministered with these agents. Fluvoxamine may
increase theophylline levels threefold and warfarin levels twofold, with
significant clinical consequences; thus, the serum levels of the latter drugs
should be closely monitored, and the doses adjusted accordingly.
Fluvoxamine raises concentrations and may increase the activity of clozapine,
carbamazepine, methadone (Dolophine, Methadose), propranolol (Inderal),
and diltiazem (Cardizem). Fluvoxamine has no significant interactions with
lorazepam (Ativan) or digoxin (Lanoxin).
Citalopram. Citalopram is not a potent inhibitor of any CYP enzymes.
Concurrent administration of cimetidine increases concentrations of
citalopram by about 40 percent. Citalopram does not significantly affect the
metabolism of, nor is its metabolism significantly affected by, digoxin,
lithium, warfarin, carbamazepine, or imipramine (Tofranil). Citalopram
increases the plasma concentrations of metoprolol (Lopressor) twofold, but
this usually does not affect BP or heart rate. Data on coadministration of
citalopram and potent inhibitors of CYP3A4 or CYP2D6 are not available.
Escitalopram. Escitalopram is a moderate inhibitor of CYP2D6 and has
been shown to raise desipramine (Norpramin) and metoprolol concentrations
significantly.
Vilazodone. Vilazodone dose should be reduced to 20 mg when




<<<PAGE 2018>>>

is necessary for persons with renal disease.
Drug Interactions and Laboratory Interferences. Nefazodone should
not be given concomitantly with MAOIs. Also, nefazodone has particular
drug–drug interactions with the triazolobenzodiazepines triazolam (Halcion)
and alprazolam (Xanax) because of the inhibition of CYP3A4 by nefazodone.
Potentially elevated levels of each of these drugs can develop after
administration of nefazodone, but the levels of nefazodone are generally not
affected. The dose of triazolam should be lowered by 75 percent, and the
dose of alprazolam should be lowered by 50 percent, when given
concomitantly with nefazodone.
Nefazodone may slow the metabolism of digoxin; therefore, digoxin levels
should be monitored carefully in persons taking both medications.
Nefazodone also slows the metabolism of haloperidol (Haldol) so that the
dosage of haloperidol should be reduced in persons taking both medications.
The addition of nefazodone may also exacerbate the adverse effects of
lithium carbonate (Eskalith).
There are no known laboratory interferences associated with nefazodone.
Dosage and Clinical Guidelines. Nefazodone is available in 50-, 200-,
and 250-mg unscored tablets and 100- and 150-mg scored tablets. The
recommended starting dosage of nefazodone is 100 mg twice a day, but 50
mg twice a day may be better tolerated, especially by elderly persons. The
dosage should be slowly raised in increments of 100 to 200 mg a day at
intervals of no less than 1 week per increase to limit the development of
adverse effects. The optimal dosage is 300 to 600 mg daily in two divided
doses. However, some studies report that nefazodone is effective when taken
once a day, especially at bedtime. Geriatric persons should receive dosages
about two-thirds of the usual nongeriatric dosages, with a maximum of 400
mg a day. Similar to other antidepressants, the clinical benefit of nefazodone
usually appears after 2 to 4 weeks of treatment. Patients with the
premenstrual syndrome are treated with a flexible dosage that averages about
250 mg a day.
Trazodone




<<<PAGE 2090>>>

consisting of fever, rash, eosinophilia, and possibly fatal myocarditis.
Cleft palate, fingernail hypoplasia, microcephaly, and spina bifida in
infants may be associated with the maternal use of carbamazepine during
pregnancy. Pregnant women should not use carbamazepine unless necessary.
All women with childbearing potential should take 1 to 4 mg of folic acid
daily, even if they are not trying to conceive. Carbamazepine is secreted in
breast milk.
Drug Interactions. Carbamazepine decreases serum concentrations of
numerous drugs as a result of the prominent induction of hepatic CYP3A4
(Table 21-39). Monitoring for a decrease in clinical effects is frequently
indicated. Carbamazepine can decrease the blood concentrations of oral
contraceptives, resulting in breakthrough bleeding and uncertain prophylaxis
against pregnancy. Carbamazepine should not be administered with MAOIs,
which should be discontinued at least 2 weeks before initiating treatment with
carbamazepine. Grapefruit juice inhibits the hepatic metabolism of
carbamazepine. When carbamazepine and valproate are used in combination,
the dosage of carbamazepine should be decreased because valproate displaces
carbamazepine binding on proteins, and the dosage of valproate may need to
be increased.
Table 21-39
Carbamazepine: Drug Interactions
Effect of Carbamazepine on Plasma Agents that May Affect
Concentrations of Concomitant
Carbamazepine Plasma
Agents
Concentrations
Carbamazepine may decrease drug Agents that may increase
plasma concentration of:
carbamazepine plasma
Acetaminophen
concentration:
Alprazolam
Allopurinol
Amitriptyline
Cimetidine
Bupropion
Clarithromycin
Clomipramine
Danazol
Clonazepam
Diltiazem
Clozapine
Erythromycin




<<<PAGE 2114>>>

The absorption, the attainment of peak concentrations, and the onset of
action are quickest for diazepam (Valium), lorazepam (Ativan), alprazolam
(Xanax), triazolam (Halcion), and estazolam (ProSom). The rapid onset of
effects is vital to persons who take a single dose of a benzodiazepine to calm
an episodic burst of anxiety or to fall asleep rapidly. Several benzodiazepines
are effective after intravenous (IV) injection, but only lorazepam and
midazolam (Versed) have rapid and reliable absorption after intramuscular
(IM) administration.
Diazepam, chlordiazepoxide, clonazepam (Klonopin), clorazepate,
flurazepam (Dalmane), and quazepam (Doral) have plasma half-lives of 30
hours to more than 100 hours and are technically described as long-acting
benzodiazepines. The plasma half-lives of these compounds can be as high as
200 hours in persons whose metabolism is genetically slow. Because the
attainment of steady-state plasma concentrations of the drugs can take up to 2
weeks, persons may experience symptoms and signs of toxicity after only 7
to 10 days of treatment with a dosage that seemed initially to be in the
therapeutic range.
Clinically, half-life alone does not necessarily determine the duration of
therapeutic action for most benzodiazepines. The fact that all
benzodiazepines are lipid-soluble to varying degrees means that
benzodiazepines and their active metabolites bind to plasma proteins. The
extent of this binding is proportional to their lipid solubility. The amount of
protein binding varies from 70 to 99 percent. Distribution, onset, and
termination of action after a single dose are thus determined mainly by
benzodiazepine lipid solubility, not elimination half-life. Preparations with
high lipid solubility, such as diazepam and alprazolam, are absorbed rapidly
from the GI tract and distribute rapidly to the brain by passive diffusion along
a concentration gradient, resulting in a rapid onset of action. However, as the
concentration of the medication increases in the brain and decreases in the
bloodstream, the concentration gradient reverses itself, and these medications
leave the brain rapidly, resulting in fast cessation of drug effect. Drugs with
longer elimination half-lives, such as diazepam, may remain in the
bloodstream for a substantially more extended time than their actual
pharmacologic action at benzodiazepine receptors because the concentration
in the brain decreases rapidly below the level necessary for a noticeable
effect.




<<<PAGE 2115>>>

In contrast, lorazepam, which has a shorter elimination half-life than
diazepam but is less lipid-soluble, has a slower onset of action after a single
dose because the drug is absorbed and enters the brain more slowly.
However, the duration of action after a single dose is longer because it takes
longer for lorazepam to leave the brain and for brain levels to decrease below
the concentration that produces an effect. In chronic dosing, some of these
differences are not as apparent because brain levels are in equilibrium with
higher and more consistent steady-state blood levels, but additional doses still
produce a more rapid but briefer action with diazepam than with lorazepam.
Benzodiazepines are distributed widely in adipose tissue. As a result,
medications may persist in the body after discontinuation longer than would
be predicted from their elimination half-lives. Also, the dynamic half-life
(i.e., duration of action on the receptor) may be longer than the elimination
half-life.
The advantages of long–half-life drugs over short–half-life drugs include
less frequent dosing, less variation in plasma concentration, and less severe
withdrawal phenomena. The disadvantages include drug accumulation,
increased risk of daytime psychomotor impairment, and increased daytime
sedation.
The half-lives of lorazepam, oxazepam (Serax), temazepam (Restoril), and
estazolam are between 8 and 30 hours. Alprazolam has a half-life of 10 to 15
hours, and triazolam has the shortest half-life (2 to 3 hours) of all the orally
administered benzodiazepines. Rebound insomnia and anterograde amnesia
are thought to be more of a problem with the short–half-life drugs than with
the long–half-life drugs.
Because the administration of medications more frequently than the
elimination half-life leads to drug accumulation, medications such as
diazepam and flurazepam accumulate with daily dosing, eventually resulting
in increased daytime sedation.
Some benzodiazepines (e.g., oxazepam) are conjugated directly by
glucuronidation and are excreted. Most benzodiazepines are oxidized first by
CYP3A4 and CYP2C19, often to active metabolites. These metabolites may
then be hydroxylated to another active metabolite. For example, diazepam is
oxidized to desmethyldiazepam, which, in turn, is hydroxylated to produce
oxazepam. These products undergo glucuronidation to inactive metabolites.
Several benzodiazepines (e.g., diazepam, chlordiazepoxide) have the same




<<<PAGE 2117>>>

of panic disorder, benzodiazepines have the advantage of working quickly
and not causing significant sexual dysfunction and weight gain. However, the
SSRIs are still often preferred because they target common comorbid
conditions, such as depression or OCD. Benzodiazepines and SSRIs can be
initiated together to treat acute panic symptoms; use of the benzodiazepine
can be tapered after 3 to 4 weeks once the therapeutic benefits of the SSRI
have emerged.
SOCIAL ANXIETY DISORDER. Clonazepam is an effective treatment for social

anxiety disorder. Also, several other benzodiazepines (e.g., diazepam) have
been used as adjunctive medications for the treatment of social anxiety
disorder.
Benzodiazepines are used adjunctively for
treatment of adjustment disorder with anxiety, pathologic anxiety associated
with life events (e.g., after an accident), OCD, and PTSD.
OTHER ANXIETY DISORDERS.

ANXIETY ASSOCIATED WITH DEPRESSION. Depressed patients often experience

significant anxiety, and antidepressant drugs may cause initial exacerbation
of these symptoms. Accordingly, benzodiazepines are indicated for the
treatment of anxiety associated with depression.
Bipolar I and II Disorders
Clonazepam, lorazepam, and alprazolam are useful in the management of
acute manic episodes and as an adjuvant to maintenance therapy instead of
antipsychotics. As an adjuvant to lithium (Eskalith) or lamotrigine
(Lamictal), clonazepam may result in an increased time between cycles and
fewer depressive episodes. Benzodiazepines may help patients with bipolar
disorder sleep better.
Catatonia. Lorazepam, sometimes in low doses (less than 5 mg/day) and
sometimes in very high doses (12 mg/day or more), is regularly used to treat
acute catatonia, which is more frequently associated with bipolar disorder
than with schizophrenia. Other benzodiazepines have also been said to be
helpful. However, there are no valid controlled trials of benzodiazepines in
catatonia. Chronic catatonia does not respond as well to benzodiazepines.




<<<PAGE 2120>>>

with preexisting brain damage. Allergic reactions to the drugs are rare, but a
few studies report maculopapular rashes and generalized itching. The
symptoms of benzodiazepine intoxication include confusion, slurred speech,
ataxia, drowsiness, dyspnea, and hyporeflexia.
Triazolam has received significant attention in the media because of an
alleged association with aggression. Therefore, the manufacturer
recommends that the drug be used for no more than 10 days for the treatment
of insomnia and that physicians carefully evaluate the emergence of any
abnormal thinking or behavioral changes in persons treated with triazolam,
giving appropriate consideration to all potential causes. Triazolam was
banned in Great Britain in 1991.
Persons with hepatic disease and elderly persons are particularly likely to
have adverse effects and toxicity from the benzodiazepines, including hepatic
coma, especially when the drugs are administered repeatedly or in high
dosages. Benzodiazepines can produce clinically significant impairment of
respiration in persons with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and sleep
apnea. Alprazolam may exert a direct appetite stimulant effect and may cause
weight gain. The benzodiazepines should be used with caution by persons
with a history of substance abuse, cognitive disorders, renal disease, hepatic
disease, porphyria, CNS depression, or myasthenia gravis.
Some data indicate that benzodiazepines are teratogenic; therefore, their
use during pregnancy is not advised. Moreover, the use of benzodiazepines in
the third trimester can precipitate a withdrawal syndrome in newborns. The
drugs are secreted in the breast milk in sufficient concentrations to affect
newborns. Benzodiazepines may cause dyspnea, bradycardia, and drowsiness
in nursing babies.
Tolerance, Dependence, and Withdrawal. When benzodiazepines are
used for short periods (1 to 2 weeks) in moderate dosages, they usually cause
no significant tolerance, dependence, or withdrawal effects. The short-acting
benzodiazepines (e.g., triazolam) may be an exception to this rule because
some persons have reported increased anxiety the day after taking a single
dose of the drug and then stopping its use. Some persons also report a
tolerance for the anxiolytic effects of benzodiazepines and require increased
doses to maintain the clinical remission of symptoms.
The appearance of a withdrawal syndrome, also called discontinuation




<<<PAGE 2121>>>

syndrome, depends on how long a person takes the drug, what dose, how
quickly they taper it, and the half-life of the compound. Benzodiazepine
withdrawal syndrome consists of anxiety, nervousness, diaphoresis,
restlessness, irritability, fatigue, lightheadedness, tremor, insomnia, and
weakness (Table 21-44). Abrupt discontinuation of benzodiazepines,
particularly those with short half-lives, is associated with severe withdrawal
symptoms, which may include depression, paranoia, delirium, and seizures.
These severe symptoms are more likely to occur if flumazenil is used for the
rapid reversal of the benzodiazepine receptor agonist effects. Some features
of the syndrome may occur in as many as 90 percent of persons treated with
the drugs. The development of severe withdrawal syndrome is seen only in
persons who have taken high dosages for long periods. The syndrome may be
delayed for 1 or 2 weeks in persons who had been taking benzodiazepines
with long half-lives. Alprazolam seems to be significantly associated with an
immediate and severe withdrawal syndrome and should be tapered gradually.
When the medication is to be discontinued, the drug must be tapered
slowly (25 percent a week); otherwise, recurrence or rebound of symptoms is
likely. Monitoring of any withdrawal symptoms (possibly with a standardized
rating scale) and psychological support of the person are helpful in the
successful accomplishment of benzodiazepine discontinuation. Concurrent
use of carbamazepine (Tegretol) during benzodiazepine discontinuation has
been reported to permit a more rapid and better-tolerated withdrawal than
does a gradual taper alone. The dosage range of carbamazepine used to
facilitate withdrawal is 400 to 500 mg a day. Some clinicians report particular
difficulty in tapering and discontinuing alprazolam, especially in persons who
have been receiving high dosages for long periods. There have been reports
of successful discontinuation of alprazolam by switching to clonazepam,
which is then gradually withdrawn.
Table 21-44
Signs and Symptoms of Benzodiazepine Withdrawal
Anxiety

Tremor

Irritability

Depersonalization

Insomnia

Hyperesthesia




<<<PAGE 2122>>>

Hyperacusis

Myoclonus

Nausea

Delirium

Difficulty concentrating

Seizures

Drug Interactions
The most common and potentially severe benzodiazepine receptor agonist
interaction is excessive sedation and respiratory depression occurring when
benzodiazepines are administered concomitantly with other CNS depressants,
such as alcohol, barbiturates, tricyclic and tetracyclic drugs, DRAs, opioids,
and antihistamines. Ataxia and dysarthria may be likely to occur when
lithium, antipsychotics, and clonazepam are combined. The combination of
benzodiazepines and clozapine (Clozaril) has been reported to cause delirium
and should be avoided. Cimetidine (Tagamet), disulfiram (Antabuse),
isoniazid, estrogen, and oral contraceptives increase the plasma concentration
of diazepam, chlordiazepoxide, clorazepate, and flurazepam. However,
antacids may reduce the GI absorption of benzodiazepines. The plasma
concentrations of triazolam and alprazolam are increased to potentially toxic
concentrations by nefazodone (Serzone) and fluvoxamine (Luvox).
The manufacturer of nefazodone recommends that the dosage of triazolam
be lowered by 75 percent, and the dosage of alprazolam be lowered by 50
percent, when given concomitantly with nefazodone. Over-the-counter
preparations of the kava plant, advertised as a “natural tranquilizer,” can
potentiate the action of benzodiazepine receptor agonists through synergistic
overactivation of GABA receptors. Carbamazepine can lower the plasma
concentration of alprazolam. Antacids and food may decrease the plasma
concentrations of benzodiazepines, and smoking may increase the
metabolism of benzodiazepines. The benzodiazepines may increase the
plasma concentrations of phenytoin and digoxin (Lanoxin). The SSRIs may
prolong and exacerbate the severity of zolpidem-induced hallucinations.
Deaths have been reported when parental lorazepam is given with parental
olanzapine.
Dosage and Clinical Guidelines




<<<PAGE 2123>>>

The clinical decision to treat an anxious person with a benzodiazepine should
be carefully considered. Medical causes of anxiety (e.g., thyroid dysfunction,
caffeinism, and prescription medications) should be ruled out.
Benzodiazepine use should be started at a low dosage, and the person should
be instructed regarding the drug’s sedative properties and abuse potential. An
estimated length of therapy should be decided at the beginning of therapy,
and the need for continued therapy should be reevaluated at least monthly
because of the problems associated with long-term use. However, certain
persons with anxiety disorders are unresponsive to treatments other than
benzodiazepines in long-term use.
Benzodiazepines are available in a wide range of formulations.
Clonazepam is available in a wafer formulation that facilitates its use in
patients who have trouble swallowing pills. Alprazolam is available in an
extended-release form, which reduces the frequency of dosing. Some
benzodiazepines are more potent than others in that one compound requires a
relatively smaller dosage than another compound to achieve the same effect.
For example, clonazepam requires 0.25 mg to achieve the same effect as 5
mg of diazepam; thus, clonazepam is considered a high-potency
benzodiazepine. Conversely, oxazepam has an approximate dosage
equivalence of 15 mg and is a low-potency drug.
Table 21-43 lists preparations and doses of medications discussed in this
chapter.

BUSPIRONE
Buspirone hydrochloride (BuSpar) is classified as an azapirone and is
chemically distinct from other psychotropic agents. It acts on two types of
receptors, serotonin (5-HT) and dopamine (D). It has a high affinity for the 5HT1A serotonin receptor, acting as an agonist or partial agonist, and moderate
affinity for the D2 dopamine receptor, acting as both an agonist and an
antagonist. The approved indication for this psychotropic drug is for the
treatment of GAD. It was initially believed to be a better alternative to the
benzodiazepine drug group because buspirone does not possess
anticonvulsant and muscle relaxant effects. Reports continue to appear that
some patients benefit from the addition of buspirone to their antidepressant
regimen. Its use in this role is more common than its use as an anxiolytic.




<<<PAGE 2172>>>

flashes. The withdrawal symptoms usually resolve after 2 weeks. However, a
protracted methadone abstinence syndrome is possible that may include
restlessness and insomnia.
The withdrawal symptoms associated with buprenorphine are similar to but
less marked than those caused by methadone. In particular, buprenorphine is
sometimes used to ease the transition from methadone to opioid receptor
antagonists or abstinence because of the relatively mild withdrawal reaction
associated with discontinuation of buprenorphine.
Drug–Drug Interactions
Opioid receptor agonists can potentiate the CNS-depressant effects of
alcohol, barbiturates, benzodiazepines, other opioids, low-potency DRAs,
tricyclic and tetracyclic drugs, and MAOIs. Carbamazepine (Tegretol),
phenytoin (Dilantin), barbiturates, rifampin (Rimactane, Rifadin), and heavy
long-term consumption of alcohol may induce hepatic enzymes, which may
lower the plasma concentration of methadone or buprenorphine and thereby
precipitate withdrawal symptoms. In contrast, however, hepatic enzyme
induction may increase the plasma concentration of active levomethadyl
metabolites and cause toxicity.
Acute opioid withdrawal symptoms may be precipitated in persons on
methadone maintenance therapy who take pure opioid receptor antagonists
such as naltrexone, nalmefene (Revex, Selincro), and naloxone (Narcan);
partial agonists such as buprenorphine; or mixed agonist–antagonists such as
pentazocine (Talwin). These symptoms may be mitigated by the use of
clonidine, a benzodiazepine, or both.
Competitive inhibition of methadone or buprenorphine metabolism after
short-term use of alcohol or administration of cimetidine (Tagamet),
erythromycin, ketoconazole (Nizoral), fluoxetine (Prozac), fluvoxamine
(Luvox), loratadine (Claritin), quinidine (Quinidex), and alprazolam (Xanax)
may lead to higher plasma concentrations or a prolonged duration of action of
methadone or buprenorphine. Medications that alkalinize the urine may
reduce methadone excretion.
Methadone maintenance may also increase plasma concentrations of
desipramine (Norpramin, Pertofrane) and fluvoxamine. The use of
methadone may increase zidovudine (Retrovir) concentrations, which




<<<PAGE 2243>>>

brewers), which is used to treat depression, decreases the effectiveness of
certain psychotropic drugs such as amitriptyline (Elavil), alprazolam (Xanax),
paroxetine (Paxil), and sertraline (Zoloft), among others. Kava kava, which is
used to treat anxiety states, has been associated with liver toxicity.
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects are possible, and toxic interactions with other drugs may
occur with all phytomedicines, dietary supplements, and medicinal foods.
Adulteration is possible, especially with phytomedicines. There are few or no
consistent standard preparations available for most herbs. The FDA does not
test medical foods; however, strict voluntary compliance is required. Safety
profiles and knowledge of adverse effects of most of these substances have
not been studied rigorously, however. Because of the paucity of clinical
trials, all of these agents should be avoided during pregnancy; some herbs
may act as abortifacients, for example. Because most of these substances or
their metabolites are secreted in breast milk, they are contraindicated during
lactation.
Clinicians should always attempt to obtain a history of herbal use or the
use of medical foods or nutritional supplements during the psychiatric
evaluation.
It is important to be nonjudgmental in dealing with patients who use these
substances. Many do so for various reasons: (1) as part of their cultural
tradition, (2) because they mistrust physicians or are dissatisfied with
conventional medicine, or (3) because they experience relief of symptoms
with the particular substance. Because patients will be more cooperative with
traditional psychiatric treatments if they are allowed to continue using their
preparations, psychiatrists should keep an open mind and not attribute all
effects to suggestion. If psychotropic agents are prescribed, the clinician must
be extraordinarily alert to the possibility of adverse effects as a result of
drug–drug interactions, because many of these compounds have ingredients
that produce physiologic changes in the body.
Table 21-64
Phytomedicinals with Psychoactive Effects




<<<PAGE 2565>>>

behavior
secondary to fear
and anxiety;
suicidal behavior

reinforcement of
social support

Adolescent crises

Suicidal attempts
Evaluation of suicidal
and ideation;
potential, extent of
substance abuse,
substance abuse,
truancy, trouble
family dynamics;
with law,
crisis-oriented family
pregnancy,
and individual
running away;
therapy;
eating disorders;
hospitalization if
psychosis
necessary;
consultation with
appropriate
extrafamilial
authorities

Agoraphobia

Panic; depression

Alprazolam, 0.25–2 mg;
antidepressant
medication

Agranulocytosis
(clozapine induced)

High fever,
pharyngitis, oral
and perianal
ulcerations

Discontinue medication
immediately;
administer
granulocyte colonystimulating factor

Akathisia

Agitation,
restlessness,
muscle
discomfort;
dysphoria

Reduce antipsychotic
dosage; propranolol
(30–120 mg a day);
benzodiazepines;
diphenhydramine
orally or IV;
benztropine IM

Alcohol-Related Emergencies




<<<PAGE 2576>>>

psychiatrically ill;
one spouse may
be seeking
hospitalization for
the other

histories from both,
psychiatric evaluation
at the time of
presentation; may be
precipitated by onset
of untreated mood
disorder or affective
symptoms caused by
medical illness or
insidious-onset
dementia; referral for
management of the
illness reduces
immediate stress and
enhances the
healthier spouse’s
coping capacity;
children may give
insights available only
to someone intimately
involved in the social
system

Migraine

Throbbing, unilateral Sumatriptan 6 mg IM
headache

Mitral valve prolapse

Associated with
panic disorder;
dyspnea and
palpitations; fear
and anxiety

Echocardiogram;
alprazolam or
propranolol

Neuroleptic malignant
syndrome

Hyperthermia;
muscle rigidity;
autonomic
instability;
parkinsonian

Discontinue
antipsychotic; IV
dantrolene;
bromocriptine orally;
hydration and cooling;




<<<PAGE 3595>>>

and mood disorders, 280
pathology, 285–287
suicide among persons with, 280, 280t
treatment, 283–285
unspecified, 278
women with, 279
Alcohol use disorders, 62, 275
epidemiology, 285
etiology, 287
behavioral theories, 287
childhood history, 287–288
genetic factors, 288, 288t
psychodynamic theories, 287
psychological theories, 287
sociocultural theories, 287
positive prognostic signs, 280, 280t
treatment of, 280–283
counseling, 282–283
detoxification, 282–282
intervention, 280, 281
medications, 283, 284t
rehabilitation, 282, 282t
Alcohol use, in adolescents, 212, 214–215. See also Substance use
disorders, in adolescents
Alcohol use, in pregnancy, 886, 886f, 886t
Alcohol withdrawal-related hallucinations, 284
Aldehyde dehydrogenase, 286
Alertness, assessment of, in MSE, 10, 11t
Alexander, Franz, 753, 937, 1078–1079
Alexithymia, 275
Alkaline phosphatase elevations, 66
Allopregnanolone, 978
Allport, Gordon, 1079
Alopecia areata, 21
Alpha-synucleinopathies, 924
Alpha waves, 999
Alprazolam (Xanax), 602, 713


