<<<PAGE 952>>>

Autonomic symptoms
(e.g., sweating,
restlessness, tremor,
and rhinorrhea)

α2-agonist

Clonidine

Anxiety and psychomotor
agitation

Benzodiazepines
Lorazepam
(usually reserved for
the inpatient setting)

Insomnia

Hypnotics

Zolpidem,
zopiclone

Sedating
antidepressants

Trazodone

Atypical antipsychotics Quetiapine
Musculoskeletal pain

GI distress and diarrhea

Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs

Ibuprofen

Antispasmodic agents

Cyclobenzaprine

Antiemetic agents

Prochlorperazine

Peripheral μ-opioid
receptor agonists

Loperamide

Symptomatic Treatment of Opioid Withdrawal. It is also possible to
treat an opioid withdrawal with nonopioid medications, primarily targeting
several uncomfortable withdrawal symptoms. Table 4-23 lists some of these
medications and their uses.
Medications for the Treatment of Opioid Use Disorder
For some individuals, opioid detoxification is not successful, and others may
not feel ready for detoxification, although they may desire freedom from the
daily struggle associated with opioid use and the associated psychosocial
problems. In these individuals, opioid substitution therapy with either
methadone or buprenorphine may be appropriate. For patients who can
complete opioid detoxification, antagonist therapy can help them to maintain




<<<PAGE 961>>>

misused in the United States, it remains a standard anxiolytic in many
countries.
Nonbenzodiazepine sedatives such as zolpidem, zaleplon, and eszopiclone
—the so-called Z drugs—have clinical effects similar to the benzodiazepines
and are also subject to misuse and dependence.
Barbiturates were popular before the introduction of
benzodiazepines, but because of their high abuse potential, their use is much
rarer today. Secobarbital was popular in the 1960s through the 1980s. It
acquired many nicknames, including “reds,” “red devils,” “seggies,” and
“downers,” among many others. Pentobarbital was also popular, and its
nicknames included “yellow jackets,” “yellows,” and “nembies.” A
secobarbital–amobarbital combination was also widely available, and was
called “reds and blues,” “rainbows,” “double-trouble,” and “tooies.”
Pentobarbital, secobarbital, and amobarbital are now under the same federal
legal controls as morphine.
The first barbiturate, barbital, was introduced in the United States in 1903.
Barbital and phenobarbital, introduced shortly after that, are long-acting
drugs with half-lives of 12 to 24 hours. Amobarbital is an intermediate-acting
barbiturate with a half-life of 6 to 12 hours. Pentobarbital and secobarbital are
short-acting barbiturates with half-lives of 3 to 6 hours. Although barbiturates
are useful and effective sedatives, they are highly lethal, with only ten times
the standard dose producing coma and death.
BARBITURATES.

BARBITURATE-LIKE SUBSTANCES. The most commonly abused barbiturate-like

substance is methaqualone. Various manufacturers produced it in the United
States until being discontinued in 1985. It is often used by young persons
who believe that the substance heightens the pleasure of sexual activity. The
street names for methaqualone include “mandrakes” (from the United
Kingdom preparation Mandrax) and “soapers” (from the brand name Sopor).
“Luding out” (from the brand name Quaalude) means getting high on
methaqualone, often along with alcohol.
Other barbiturate-like substances include meprobamate, a carbamate
derivative that has weak efficacy as an antianxiety agent but has musclerelaxant effects, chloral hydrate, a hypnotic that is highly toxic to the GI
system and when combined with alcohol, is known as a “Mickey Finn”; and




<<<PAGE 963>>>

with the benzodiazepines. Table 4-24 lists the equivalent therapeutic doses of
benzodiazepines. Even when users take grossly excessive amounts (more
than 2 g) in suicide attempts, the symptoms include only drowsiness,
lethargy, ataxia, some confusion, and mild depression of the user’s vital
signs. The most lethal overdoses occur when the user takes a benzodiazepine
in combination with other sedatives, such as alcohol. In such cases, small
doses of benzodiazepines can cause death. The availability of flumazenil, a
specific benzodiazepine antagonist, has reduced the lethality of the
benzodiazepines. Flumazenil can be used in emergency departments to
reverse the effects of benzodiazepines.
Table 4-24
Approximate
Therapeutic
Benzodiazepines

Equivalent

Doses

Generic Name

Trade Name

Dose (mg)

Alprazolam

Xanax

1

Chlordiazepoxide

Librium

25

Clonazepam

Klonopin

0.5–1.0

Clorazepate

Tranxene

15

Diazepam

Valium

10

Estazolam

Prosom

1

Flurazepam

Dalmane

30

Lorazepam

Ativan

2

Oxazepam

Serax

30

Temazepam

Restoril

20

Triazolam

Halcion

0.25

Quazepam

Doral

15

Zolpidem

Ambien

10

of




<<<PAGE 1077>>>

Hall MT, Howard MO, McCabe SE. Subtypes of adolescent
sedative/anxiolytic misusers: A latent profile analysis. Addict Behav.
2010;35(10):882.
Haller DL, Acosta MC. Characteristics of pain patients with opioid-use
disorder. Psychosomatics. 2010;51:257.
Haney M. Neurobiology of stimulants. In: Galantar M, Kleber HD, eds.
Textbook of Substance Abuse Treatment. 3rd ed. Washington, DC:
American Psychiatric Publishing; 2008:143.
Harper AD. Substance-related disorders. In: Thornhill J, ed. NMS Psychiatry.
6th ed. Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2011:109.
Hasin DS, O’Brien CP, Auriacombe M. DSM-5 criteria for substance use
disorders: Recommendations and rationale. Am J Psychiatry.
2013;170:834.
Hatsukami DK, Benowitz NL, Donny E, Henningfield J, Zeller M. Nicotine
reduction: Strategic research plan. Nicotine Tob Res. 2013;15(6):1003–
1013.
He Q, Chen X, Wu T, Li L, Fei X. Risk of dementia in long-term
benzodiazepine users: Evidence from a meta-analysis of observational
studies. J Clin Neurol. 2019;15:9–19.
Herlitz LC, Markowitz GS, Farris AB, Schwimmer JA, Stokes MB, Kunis C,
Colvin RB, D’Agati VD. Development of focal segmental
glomerulosclerosis after anabolic steroid abuse. J Am Soc Nephrol.
2010;21:163.
Hoblyn JC, Balt SL, Woodard SA, Brooks JO. Substance use disorders as
risk factors for psychiatric hospitalization in bipolar disorder. Psychiatr
Serv. 2009;60:55.
Hodgins DC. Reliability and validity of the Sheehan Disability Scale
modified for pathological gambling. BMC Psychiatry. 2013;13:177.
Hodgins DC, Fick GH, Murray R, Cunningham JA. Internet-based
interventions for disordered gamblers: Study protocol for a randomized
controlled trial of online self-directed cognitive-behavioral motivational
therapy. BMC Public Health. 2013;13:10.
Hoque R, Chesson AL Jr. Zolpidem-induced sleepwalking, sleep related
eating disorder, and sleep-driving: Fluorine-18-flourodeoxyglucose
positron emission tomography analysis, and a literature review of other
unexpected clinical effects of zolpidem. J Clin Sleep Med. 2009;5(5):471.




<<<PAGE 1436>>>

Electroconvulsive therapy (for refractory depression with persistent
melancholic features across all dissociative identity disorder
alters)
Mood stabilizers (more useful for PTSD and anxiety than mood
swings)
Divalproex
Lamotrigine
Oral or intramuscular benzodiazepines
Medications for sleep problems
Low-dose trazodone
Low-dose mirtazapine
Low-dose tricyclic antidepressants
Low-dose neuroleptics
Benzodiazepines (often less helpful for sleep problems in this
population)
Zolpidem
Anticholinergic agents (diphenhydramine, hydroxyzine)
Medications for self-injury, addictions
Naltrexone
Brainwashing
There are no empirical treatment studies of individuals subjected to extreme
coercion applied in the service of indoctrination into a belief system or an
attempt at identity alteration. The basic principles of phased trauma treatment
would seem to provide an organizing framework for their care, as for victims
of other forms of torture. Family and social interventions may be necessary
because of the duress and disruption accompanying the precipitating events
and the social effects of the profound changes in the patient’s attitudes,
behaviors, and beliefs, as well as sequestration from everyday events during
the period of captivity.
Ganser Syndrome
No systematic treatment studies have been conducted, given the rarity of this
condition. In most case reports, the patient has been hospitalized and
provided with a protective and supportive environment. In some instances,




<<<PAGE 1515>>>

also has high comorbidity with sleepwalking, restless legs syndrome, and
obstructive sleep apnea, conditions that are rarely found among night-eating
syndrome patients. Episodes of sleep-related eating disorder have been
reported after the use of certain medications, including zolpidem, triazolam,
olanzapine, and risperidone.

COMORBIDITY
Anorexia Nervosa
Table 13-5 lists comorbid psychiatric conditions associated with anorexia
nervosa. Overall, anorexia nervosa is associated with depression in 50
percent of cases, social phobia in 22 percent of cases, and obsessivecompulsive disorder (OCD) in 35 percent of cases.
The suicide rate is higher in persons with the binge eating–purging type of
anorexia nervosa than in those with the restricting type.
Binge eating–purging persons are likely to be associated with substance
abuse, impulse control disorders, and personality disorders. Persons with
restricting anorexia nervosa often have obsessive-compulsive traits
concerning food and other matters. Some persons with anorexia nervosa may
purge but not binge.
Bulimia Nervosa
Bulimia nervosa occurs in individuals with high rates of mood disorders and
impulse control disorders. Bulimia nervosa also co-occurs with substance use
disorders, particularly alcohol. Patients with bulimia nervosa also have
increased rates of anxiety disorders, bipolar I disorder, dissociative disorders,
and histories of sexual abuse. Patients with bulimia nervosa who have
concurrent seasonal affective disorder and patterns of atypical depression
(with overeating and oversleeping in low-light months) may manifest
seasonal worsening of both bulimia nervosa and depressive features.
Individuals with bulimia nervosa who purge may be at risk for certain
medical complications such as hypokalemia from vomiting or laxative abuse
and hypochloremic alkalosis. Those who vomit repeatedly are at risk for
gastric and esophageal tears, although these complications are rare.




<<<PAGE 1558>>>

frustrated and concerned about sleeplessness and its effect on her work.
Her work involves sitting at a microscope for 6 hours out of a 9-hour
working day and meticulously documenting her findings. Her final output
has not suffered, but she must now “double check” for accuracy.
She describes herself as a worrier and a Type-A personality. The
patient does not know how to relax. For example, on vacation she
continually worries about things that can go wrong. She will not even
begin to unwind until she has arrived at the destination, checked in, and
unpacked. Even then, she is unable to relax.
Medical history is unremarkable except for tonsillectomy (age 16
years),
migraine
headaches
(current),
and
diet-controlled
hypercholesterolemia. She takes naproxen as needed for headache. She
does not currently drink caffeinated beverages, smoke tobacco, or drink
alcoholic beverages. She does not use recreational drugs.
The problem with insomnia began after relocation to a new city and
place of employment. She attributes her insomnia to the noisy
neighborhood in which she now lives. She first sought treatment 18
months ago. Her family practice physician diagnosed depression, and she
was started on fluoxetine that made her “climb the walls.” Antihistamines
were tried next with similar results. She was then switched to low-dose
trazodone (for sleep) and developed nausea. After these medical
interventions, she sought medical care elsewhere. Zolpidem 5 mg was
prescribed, but it made her feel drugged and upon discontinuation she had
withdrawal effects. Another family practice physician diagnosed
“nonspecific anxiety disorder” and began buspirone; an experience she
describes as “having an alien try to climb out of my skin.” Buspirone was
discontinued. Paroxetine was tried for 8 weeks with no effect. Finally, a
psychiatrist was consulted, who diagnosed adult attention-deficit disorder
(without hyperactivity) and suggested treatment with methylphenidate. At
this point, the patient was convinced that a stimulant would not help her
insomnia and demanded referral to a sleep disorders center.
DISCUSSION
Ms. W’s symptoms fall into the broad category of an insomnia, and the
symptoms began after having moved from one city to another.
Environmental sleep disorder (noise) and adjustment sleep disorder (new




<<<PAGE 1622>>>

TREATMENT APPROACH
Insomnia
Pharmacologic Treatment. For many years, benzodiazepines were the
most commonly prescribed sedative–hypnotic medications for treating
insomnia. Other benzodiazepine-receptor agonists (e.g., zolpidem and similar
drugs) then emerged as an option to treat insomnia. The subsequent
development of a low-dose antihistamine (doxepin), a melatonin receptor
agonist (ramelteon), and an orexin antagonist (suvorexant) have more
recently augmented the armamentarium of medications approved for treating
insomnia. However, unapproved off-label (and not recommended) use of
sedating antidepressants is commonplace. Additionally, a variety of over-thecounter (OTC) sleep aids is available. Nonprescription formulas include
sedating antihistamines, protein precursors, and other substances. Ltryptophan was trendy and readily available at health food stores until an
outbreak of eosinophilia led to pulling it off the shelves. However, the cause
was a single manufacturer, and L-tryptophan subsequently became available
OTC again. Melatonin is the leader among self-administered food additives
believed by some to alleviate sleeplessness. Low-dose melatonin can improve
sleep when used to align or reentrain the circadian rhythm with the desired
sleep–wake schedule.
Table 15-23
Disorders That Are Commonly Comorbid with Various
Sleep Disorders
Insomnia Disorder
Bipolar disorder
Generalized anxiety disorder
Major depressive disorder
Posttraumatic stress disorder
Schizophrenia
Hypersomnolence Disorder
Bipolar disorder




<<<PAGE 1624>>>

Diabetes mellitus
Gastrointestinal disease
Substance use disorders
Parasomnias and Sleep-Related Movement Disorders
Sleepwalking
Obsessive compulsive disorder
Major depression
Nightmare disorder
Posttraumatic stress disorder
Acute stress disorder
Schizophrenia
Anxiety disorders
Personality disorders
Bereavement
Pain
Neurodegenerative disorders
Cardiovascular disease
REM sleep behavior disorder
Narcolepsy
Neurodegenerative disorders
Restless legs syndrome
Depression
Anxiety
Attentional disorders
Iron deficiency
Drug manufacturers must rigorously test prescription medications in
clinical trials; therefore, they hold an advantage over the virtually untested
OTCs. Medication must be proven safe and effective to become FDA
approved.
Most hypnotic medications are approved for short-, not long-term use.
Exceptions include zolpidem-modified release, eszopiclone, and ramelteon,
which the FDA approved for long-term therapy. When properly used,
hypnotics can provide immediate and adequate relief from sleeplessness.




<<<PAGE 1625>>>

Insomnia, however, usually returns upon discontinuation of dosing.
The clinical practice guideline from the American Academy of Sleep
Medicine recommends the use of suvorexant, eszopiclone, zaleplon,
zolpidem, triazolam, temazepam, ramelteon, and doxepin for the treatment of
insomnia (with specific agents having different indications for sleep-onset or
sleep-maintenance insomnia). They recommend against the use of trazodone,
tiagabine, diphenhydramine, melatonin, tryptophan, and valerian for
insomnia treatment.
Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy for Insomnia. Cognitive-behavioral
therapy for insomnia (CBTi), as a treatment modality, uses a combination of
behavioral and cognitive techniques to overcome dysfunctional sleep
behaviors, misperceptions, and distorted, disruptive thoughts about sleep.
Behavioral techniques include universal sleep hygiene, stimulus control
therapy, sleep restriction therapy, relaxation therapies, and biofeedback.
Studies repeatedly show significant, sustained improvement in sleep
symptoms, including number and duration of awakenings and sleep latency,
from CBTi. Short-term benefits are similar to that of medication, but CBTi
tends to have lasting benefits, even 36 months after treatment. With the
cessation of the medication, insomnia frequently returns and is sometimes
accompanied by rebound insomnia. CBTi has no apparent adverse effects.
There are no established “best practice” guidelines for length or quantity of
sessions. CBTi, however, is not without limitations. Most data do not
compare the efficacy of the individual components of CBTi. However, sleep
hygiene education alone produces an insignificant effect on sleep. Intuitively,
the multicomponent approach addresses many of the variables contributing to
insomnia. Other limitations of CBTi include lack of or unavailability of
trained specialists, cost of sessions, and noncoverage by insurance carriers.
The effects of CBTi take longer to emerge than the effects of medications.
Usually, when patients finally come for treatment of their insomnia, they are
desperate. It is challenging to convince them to try a therapy that may take
several weeks before it will provide relief. Furthermore, patients do not
assume a passive role in this type of therapy; they must be active participants.
Many individuals not only want a “quick fix,” but they also want to undergo
a procedure or have something administered rather than be involved in the
therapeutic process. For optimal CBTi, patients must commit to come to




<<<PAGE 1902>>>

Cognitive Impairment. Cognitive impairment means a disturbance in the
capacity to think. Some agents, such as the benzodiazepine agonists, are
recognized as causes of cognitive impairment. Other widely used
psychotropics, such as the SSRIs, lamotrigine (Lamictal), topiramate
(Topamax), gabapentin (Neurontin), lithium, TCAs, and bupropion, however,
are also associated with varying degrees of memory impairment and wordfinding difficulties. In contrast to the benzodiazepine-induced anterograde
amnesia, these agents cause a more subtle type of absent-mindedness. Drugs
with anticholinergic properties are likely to worsen memory performance.
Sweating. Severe perspiration unrelated to ambient temperature is
associated with TCAs, SSRIs, and venlafaxine. This side effect is often
socially disabling. Attempts can be made to treat this side effect with alpha
agents, such as terazosin (Hytrin) and oxybutynin (Ditropan).
Cardiovascular Disturbances. Newer agents are less likely to have
direct cardiac effects. Many older agents, such as TCAs and phenothiazines,
affected BP and cardiac conduction. Thioridazine (Mellaril), which has been
in use for decades, has been shown to prolong the QTc interval in a doserelated manner and may increase the risk of sudden death by delaying
ventricular repolarization and causing torsades de pointes. Newer drugs are
now routinely scrutinized for evidence of cardiac effects. A promising
treatment for psychosis, sertindole (Serlect), was not marketed because the
FDA would have required a black box warning. Slight QTc effects noted with
ziprasidone (Geodon) delayed the marketing of that drug. Clozapine can
cause myocarditis in rare cases.
Rash. Any medication is a potential source of a drug rash. Some
psychotropics, such as carbamazepine (Equetro, Tegretol) and lamotrigine,
have been linked to an increased risk of severe exfoliative dermatitis.
Commonly referred to as Stevens–Johnson syndrome, this condition is a
systemic, immune-mediated reaction that can prove fatal or result in
permanent scarring or blindness. All patients should be informed about the
potential seriousness of widespread lesions that occur above the neck, that
involve the mucous membranes, and that may be associated with fever and




<<<PAGE 1904>>>

prescriptions for small quantities, this practice passes along increased copay
costs to the patient. Many pharmacy benefit management programs
encourage the prescribing of a 3-month supply of medication.
Table 21-7
Sedative-Hypnotics Cited by the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration
Drug

Manufacturer

Zolpidem (Ambien/Ambien CR)

Sanofi Aventis

Butabarbital (Butisol Sodium)

MedPointe Pharmaceuticals

Pentobarbital and carbromal (Carbrital) Parke-Davis
Flurazepam (Dalmane)

Valeant Pharmaceuticals

Quazepam (Doral)

Questcor Pharmaceuticals

Triazolam (Halcion)

Pfizer

Eszopiclone (Lunesta)

Sepracor

Ethchlorvynol (Placidyl)

Abbott

Estazolam (Prosom)

Abbott

Temazepam (Restoril)

Tyco Healthcare

Ramelteon (Rozerem)

Takeda

Secobarbital (Seconal)

Lilly

Zaleplon (Sonata)

King Pharmaceuticals

In cases in which suicide is a significant concern, an attempt should be
made to verify that the medication is not being hoarded for a later overdose
attempt. Random pill counts or asking a family member to dispense daily
doses may be helpful. Some patients attempt suicide just as they are
beginning to recover. Large quantities of medications with a low therapeutic
index should be prescribed judiciously. Another reason to limit the number of




<<<PAGE 1992>>>

(Nolvadex, Soltamox). The combined use of SSRIs and NSAIDs increases
the risk of gastric bleeding.
Table 21-17
Serotonin Syndrome Symptoms
Diarrhea

Myoclonus

Diaphoresis

Hyperactive reflexes

Tremor

Disorientation

Ataxia

Lability of mood

The SSRIs, particularly fluvoxamine, should not be used with clozapine
because it raises clozapine concentrations, increasing the risk of seizure. The
SSRIs may increase the duration and severity of zolpidem (Ambien)-induced
side effects, including hallucinations.
Fluoxetine. Fluoxetine can be administered with tricyclic drugs, but the
clinician should use low dosages of the tricyclic drug. Because the hepatic
enzyme CYP2D6 metabolizes it, fluoxetine may interfere with the
metabolism of other drugs in the 7 percent of the population who have an
inefficient isoform of this enzyme, the so-called poor metabolizers.
Fluoxetine may slow down the metabolism of carbamazepine (Tegretol),
antineoplastic agents, diazepam (Valium), and phenytoin (Dilantin). Drug
interactions have been described for fluoxetine that may affect the plasma
levels of benzodiazepines, antipsychotics, and lithium. Fluoxetine and other
SSRIs may interact with warfarin (Coumadin), increasing the risk of bleeding
and bruising.
Sertraline. Sertraline may displace warfarin from plasma proteins and may
increase the prothrombin time. The drug interaction data on sertraline support
a generally similar profile to that of fluoxetine, although sertraline does not
interact as strongly with the CYP2D6 enzyme.
Paroxetine. Paroxetine has a higher risk for drug interactions than does
either fluoxetine or sertraline because it is a more potent inhibitor of the




<<<PAGE 2068>>>

debate. A prospective 3-year study found patients who maintained a
concentration between 0.4 and 0.6 mEq/L (mean 0.54) were 2.6 times more
likely to relapse than those who maintained between 0.8 and 1.0 mEq/L
(mean 0.83). However, higher blood concentrations produced more adverse
effects and were less well tolerated.
If there is no response after 2 weeks at a concentration that is beginning to
cause adverse effects, then the person should taper off lithium over 1 to 2
weeks, and other mood-stabilizing drugs should be tried.
Patient Education. Lithium has a narrow therapeutic index, and many
factors can upset the balance between lithium concentrations that are well
tolerated and therapeutic, and those that produce side effects or toxicity. It is
thus imperative that persons taking lithium be educated about signs and
symptoms of toxicity, factors that affect lithium levels, how and when to
obtain laboratory testing, and the importance of regular communication with
the prescribing physician. Lithium concentrations can be disrupted by
common factors such as excessive sweating from ambient heat or exercise or
the use of widely prescribed agents such as ACEIs or NSAIDs. Patients may
stop taking their lithium because they are feeling well or because they are
experiencing side effects. They should be advised against discontinuing or
modifying their lithium regimen. Table 21-31 lists some essential instructions
for patients.

VALPROATE
Valproate (Depakene, Depakote), or valproic acid, is approved for the
treatment of manic episodes associated with bipolar I disorder and is one of
the most widely prescribed mood stabilizers in psychiatry. It has a rapid onset
of action and is well-tolerated, and numerous studies suggest that it reduces
the frequency and intensity of recurrent manic episodes over extended
periods.
Chemistry
Valproate is a simple-chain branch carboxylic acid. It is called valproic acid
because it is rapidly converted to the acid form in the stomach. Multiple
formulations of valproic acid are marketed. These include valproic acid




<<<PAGE 2112>>>

agents for children.

21.4 Anxiolytics
BENZODIAZEPINES AND DRUGS ACTING ON GABA
RECEPTORS
The first benzodiazepine to be introduced was chlordiazepoxide (Librium), in
1959. In 1963, diazepam (Valium) became available. Over the next three
decades, superior safety and tolerability helped the benzodiazepines replace
the older antianxiety and hypnotic medications, such as the barbiturates and
meprobamate (Miltown). Dozens of benzodiazepines and drugs acting on
benzodiazepine receptors have been synthesized and marketed worldwide.
Many of these agents are not available in the United States. Also, some
benzodiazepines have been discontinued because of a lack of use. Table 2143 lists agents currently available in the United States.
The benzodiazepines derive their name from their molecular structure.
They share a common effect on receptors that have been termed
benzodiazepine receptors, which in turn modulate GABA activity.
Nonbenzodiazepine agonists, such as zolpidem (Ambien), zaleplon (Sonata),
and eszopiclone (Lunesta), are similar to these drugs as they bind at a
location close to the benzodiazepine receptor. However, we discuss these
with the medications for insomnia. Flumazenil (Romazicon), a
benzodiazepine receptor antagonist used to reverse benzodiazepine-induced
sedation and in emergency care of benzodiazepine overdosage, is also
covered here.
Because benzodiazepines have a rapid anxiolytic sedative effect, they are
most commonly used for acute treatment of insomnia, anxiety, agitation, or
anxiety associated with any psychiatric disorder. Also, the benzodiazepines
are used as anesthetics, anticonvulsants, and muscle relaxants and as the
preferred treatment for catatonia. Because of the risk of psychological and
physical dependence associated with long-term use of benzodiazepines,
ongoing assessment should be made as to the continued clinical need for
these drugs in treating patients. In most patients, given the nature of their




<<<PAGE 2122>>>

Hyperacusis

Myoclonus

Nausea

Delirium

Difficulty concentrating

Seizures

Drug Interactions
The most common and potentially severe benzodiazepine receptor agonist
interaction is excessive sedation and respiratory depression occurring when
benzodiazepines are administered concomitantly with other CNS depressants,
such as alcohol, barbiturates, tricyclic and tetracyclic drugs, DRAs, opioids,
and antihistamines. Ataxia and dysarthria may be likely to occur when
lithium, antipsychotics, and clonazepam are combined. The combination of
benzodiazepines and clozapine (Clozaril) has been reported to cause delirium
and should be avoided. Cimetidine (Tagamet), disulfiram (Antabuse),
isoniazid, estrogen, and oral contraceptives increase the plasma concentration
of diazepam, chlordiazepoxide, clorazepate, and flurazepam. However,
antacids may reduce the GI absorption of benzodiazepines. The plasma
concentrations of triazolam and alprazolam are increased to potentially toxic
concentrations by nefazodone (Serzone) and fluvoxamine (Luvox).
The manufacturer of nefazodone recommends that the dosage of triazolam
be lowered by 75 percent, and the dosage of alprazolam be lowered by 50
percent, when given concomitantly with nefazodone. Over-the-counter
preparations of the kava plant, advertised as a “natural tranquilizer,” can
potentiate the action of benzodiazepine receptor agonists through synergistic
overactivation of GABA receptors. Carbamazepine can lower the plasma
concentration of alprazolam. Antacids and food may decrease the plasma
concentrations of benzodiazepines, and smoking may increase the
metabolism of benzodiazepines. The benzodiazepines may increase the
plasma concentrations of phenytoin and digoxin (Lanoxin). The SSRIs may
prolong and exacerbate the severity of zolpidem-induced hallucinations.
Deaths have been reported when parental lorazepam is given with parental
olanzapine.
Dosage and Clinical Guidelines




<<<PAGE 2134>>>

BARBITURATES AND SIMILARLY ACTING DRUGS
The first barbiturate to be used in medicine was barbital (Veronal), which
was introduced in 1903. It was followed by phenobarbital (Luminal),
amobarbital (Amytal), pentobarbital (Nembutal), secobarbital (Seconal), and
thiopental (Pentothal). Many others have been synthesized, but only a
handful have been used clinically (Table 21-48). Many problems are
associated with these drugs, including high abuse and addiction potential, a
narrow therapeutic range with low therapeutic index, and unfavorable side
effects. The use of barbiturates and similar compounds such as meprobamate
(Miltown) has practically been eliminated by the benzodiazepines and
hypnotics, such as zolpidem (Ambien), eszopiclone (Lunesta), and zaleplon
(Sonata), which have a lower abuse potential and a higher therapeutic index
than the barbiturates. Nevertheless, barbiturates still have a role in the
treatment of certain mental and convulsive disorders.
Pharmacologic Actions
The barbiturates are well absorbed after oral administration. The binding of
barbiturates to plasma proteins is high, but lipid solubility varies. The
individual barbiturates are metabolized by the liver and excreted by the
kidneys. The half-lives of specific barbiturates range from 1 to 120 hours.
The barbiturates may also induce hepatic enzymes (cytochrome P450, CYP),
thereby reducing the levels of both the barbiturate and any other concurrently
administered drugs metabolized by the liver. The mechanism of action of
barbiturates involves the GABA receptor–benzodiazepine receptor–chloride
ion channel complex.
Therapeutic Indications
Electroconvulsive Therapy. Methohexital (Brevital) is commonly used
as an anesthetic agent for ECT. It has lower cardiac risks than other
barbiturate anesthetics. Used intravenously (IV), methohexital produces rapid
unconsciousness, and because of its rapid redistribution, it has a brief
duration of action (5 to 7 minutes). Typical dosing for ECT is 0.7 to 1.2
mg/kg. Methohexital can also be used to abort prolonged seizures in ECT or
to limit postictal agitation.




<<<PAGE 2142>>>

when used for conscious sedation, but it has a potential for acute adverse
effects, including respiratory depression, apnea, and bradyarrhythmias, and
the prolonged infusion can cause acidosis and mitochondrial myopathies. The
carrier used for the infusion is a soybean emulsion that can be a culture
medium for various organisms. Also, the carrier can impair macrophage
function and cause hematologic and lipid abnormalities and anaphylactic
reactions.
Etomidate. Etomidate is a carboxylated imidazole that acts at the β2 and β3
subunits of the GABAA receptor. It has a rapid onset (1 minute) and short
duration (less than 5 minutes) of action. The propylene glycol vehicle has
been linked to hyperosmolar metabolic acidosis. It has both proconvulsant
and anticonvulsant properties, and it inhibits cortisol release, with possible
adverse consequences after long-term use. It has been used in anesthesia as it
is unlikely to affect blood pressure, however it has largely been replaced by
newer medications.

21.5 Drugs Used to Treat Sleep Disorders
NONBENZODIAZEPINE GABA AGONISTS
Several of the benzodiazepines are commonly used for sleep, such as
flurazepam, temazepam, quazepam, estazolam, and triazolam. Temazepam,
flurazepam, and triazolam are benzodiazepines used for insomnia; these are
discussed with the other benzodiazepines under the anxiolytic section.
Nonbenzodiazepine agonists, such as zolpidem (Ambien), zaleplon (Sonata),
and eszopiclone (Lunesta)—the so-called “Z drugs”—are similar to these
drugs as they bind at a location close to the benzodiazepine receptor
Pharmacologic Action
Zaleplon, zolpidem, and eszopiclone are structurally distinct and vary in their
binding to the GABA receptor subunits. Benzodiazepines activate all three
specific GABA–benzodiazepine (GABA–BZ) binding sites of the GABAAreceptor, which opens chloride channels and reduces the rate of neuronal and




<<<PAGE 2143>>>

muscle firing. Zolpidem, zaleplon, and eszopiclone have selectivity for
specific subunits of the GABA receptor. This specificity may account for
their selective sedative effects and relative lack of muscle relaxant and
anticonvulsant effects.
Zolpidem, zaleplon, and eszopiclone are rapidly and well absorbed after
oral administration, although absorption can be delayed by as long as 1 hour
if they are taken with food. Zolpidem reaches peak plasma concentrations in
1.6 hours and has a half-life of 2.6 hours. Zaleplon reaches peak plasma
concentrations in 1 hour and has a half-life of 1 hour. Eszopiclone reaches
peak plasma concentrations in 1 hour. If taken immediately after a high-fat or
heavy meal, the peak is delayed by approximately 1 hour, reducing the
effects of eszopiclone on sleep onset. The terminal-phase elimination half-life
is approximately 6 hours in healthy adults. Eszopiclone is weakly bound to
plasma protein (52 to 59 percent).
The rapid metabolism and lack of active metabolites of zolpidem, zaleplon,
and eszopiclone avoid the accumulation of plasma concentrations compared
with the long-term use of benzodiazepines such as flurazepam or diazepam.
Flumazenil for Benzodiazepine Overdosage. Similar to the
benzodiazepines, flumazenil can reverse the adverse psychomotor, amnestic,
and sedative effects of zolpidem and zaleplon.
Therapeutic Indications
Insomnia. Zolpidem, zaleplon, and eszopiclone are also indicated only for
insomnia. Although these “Z drugs” are not usually associated with rebound
insomnia after the discontinuation of their use for short periods, some
patients experience increased sleep difficulties the first few nights after
discontinuing their use. The use of zolpidem, zaleplon, and eszopiclone for
periods more extended than 1 month is not associated with the delayed
emergence of adverse effects. No development of tolerance to any parameter
of sleep measurement was observed over 6 months in clinical trials of
eszopiclone.
γ-Hydroxybutyrate (GHB, Xyrem), which is approved for the treatment of
narcolepsy and improves slow-wave sleep, is also an agonist at the GABAA
receptor, where it binds to specific GHB receptors. GHB has the capacity




<<<PAGE 2144>>>

both to reduce drug craving and to induce dependence, abuse, and absence
seizures as a result of complex actions on tegmental dopaminergic systems.
Parkinson Disease. A small number of persons with idiopathic Parkinson
disease respond to long-term use of zolpidem with reduced bradykinesia and
rigidity. Zolpidem dosages of 10 mg four times daily may be tolerated
without sedation for several years.
Precautions and Adverse Reactions
Zolpidem and zaleplon are generally well tolerated. At zolpidem dosages of
10 mg/day and zaleplon dosages above 10 mg/day, a small number of persons
will experience dizziness, drowsiness, dyspepsia, or diarrhea. Zolpidem and
zaleplon are secreted in breast milk and are therefore contraindicated for use
by nursing mothers. The dosage of zolpidem and zaleplon should be reduced
in elderly persons and persons with hepatic impairment.
Zolpidem (Ambien) has been associated with automatic behavior and
amnesia. In rare cases, zolpidem may cause hallucinations and behavioral
changes. The coadministration of zolpidem and SSRIs may extend the
duration of hallucinations in susceptible patients. Eszopiclone exhibits a
dose–response relationship in elderly adults for the side effects of pain, dry
mouth, and unpleasant taste.
Zolpidem and zaleplon can produce a mild withdrawal syndrome lasting 1
day after prolonged use at higher therapeutic dosages. Rarely, a person taking
zolpidem has self-titrated up the daily dosage to 30 to 40 mg a day. Abrupt
discontinuation of such a high dosage of zolpidem may cause withdrawal
symptoms for 4 or more days. Tolerance does not develop to the sedative
effects of zolpidem and zaleplon.
Drug Interactions
These agents are most dangerous when used with other CNS depressants,
such as alcohol, barbituates, opioids, and similar drugs. Cimetidine increases
the plasma concentrations of zaleplon.
Rifampin (Rifadin), phenytoin (Dilantin), carbamazepine, and
phenobarbital (Solfoton, Luminal) significantly increase the metabolism of
zaleplon.




<<<PAGE 2145>>>

The CYP3A4 and CYP2E1 enzymes are involved in the metabolism of
eszopiclone. Eszopiclone did not show any inhibitory potential on CYP450
1A2, 2A6, 2C9, 2C19, 2D6, 2E1, and 3A4 in cryopreserved human
hepatocytes.
Laboratory Interferences
No known laboratory interferences are associated with the use of zolpidem
and zaleplon.
Dosage and Clinical Guidelines
Zaleplon is available in 5- and 10-mg capsules. A single 10-mg dose is the
usual adult dose. The dose can be increased to a maximum of 20 mg as
tolerated. A single dose of zaleplon can be expected to provide 4 hours of
sleep with minimal residual impairment. For persons older than age 65 years
or persons with hepatic impairment, an initial dose of 5 mg is advised.
Eszopiclone is available in 1-, 2-, and 3-mg tablets. The starting dose
should not exceed 1 mg in patients with severe hepatic impairment or those
taking potent CYP3A4 inhibitors. The recommended dosing to improve sleep
onset or maintenance is 2 or 3 mg for adult patients (ages 18 to 64 years) and
2 mg for older adult patients (ages 65 years and older). The 1-mg dose is for
sleep onset in older adult patients whose primary complaint is difficulty
falling asleep.
Zolpidem is available in 5- and 10-mg capsules, and 6.25- and 12.5-mg
capsules for the controlled-release capsules. There is also a sublingual tablet
and an oropharyngeal spray. The controlled-release form is usually for
problems with sleep maintenance. The sublingual and oropharyngeal forms
are for difficulties with taking the pill, or in particular circumstances. For
example, the sublingual can be used for middle of the night awakening. With
the oral capsule, the starting dose is 5 mg for females and 5 to 10 mg for
males before bedtime. A single 10-mg dose is the usual adult dose (6.25- or
12.5-mg of the controlled release). The capsule should only be taken at the
beginning of the night, as the drug can impair a person if they attempt activity
within 7 to 8 hours of using the drug. For persons older than age 65 years or
persons who are medically frail, 5 mg is the recommended dose.




<<<PAGE 2921>>>

include the splenium of the corpus callosum. Color agnosia is the inability to
recognize a color despite being able to match it. Color anomia is the inability
to name a color despite being able to point to it. Central achromatopsia is a
complete inability to perceive color.
Anton syndrome is a failure to acknowledge blindness, possibly owing to
the interruption of fibers involved in self-assessment. It is seen with bilateral
occipital lobe lesions. The most common causes are hypoxic injury, stroke,
metabolic encephalopathy, migraine, herniation resulting from mass lesions,
trauma, and leukodystrophy. Balint syndrome consists of a triad of optic
ataxia (the inability to direct optically guided movements), oculomotor
apraxia (inability to direct gaze rapidly), and simultanagnosia (inability to
integrate a visual scene to perceive it as a whole). Balint syndrome is seen in
bilateral parietooccipital lesions. Gerstmann syndrome includes agraphia,
calculation difficulties (acalculia), right-left disorientation, and finger
agnosia. It has been attributed to lesions of the dominant parietal lobe.
DEVELOPMENT OF THE VISUAL SYSTEM. In humans, the initial projections from

both eyes intermingle in the cortex. During the development of visual
connections in the early postnatal period, there is a window of time during
which binocular visual input is required for the development of ocular
dominance columns in the primary visual cortex. Ocular dominance columns
are stripes of cortex that receive input from only one eye, separated by stripes
innervated only by fibers from the other eye. Occlusion of one eye during this
critical period eliminates the persistence of its fibers in the cortex and allows
the fibers of the active eye to innervate the entire visual cortex. In contrast,
when normal binocular vision is allowed during the critical development
window, the usual dominance columns form, occluding one eye after the
completion of innervation of the cortex, produces no subsequent alteration of
the ocular dominance columns. This paradigm crystallizes the importance of
early childhood experience on the formation of adult brain circuitry.
Auditory System. Sounds are instantaneous, incremental changes in
ambient air pressure. The pressure changes cause the ear’s tympanic
membrane to vibrate; the vibration is then transmitted to the ossicles
(malleus, incus, and stapes) and thereby to the endolymph or fluid of the
cochlear spiral. Vibrations of the endolymph move cilia on hair cells, which


