<<<PAGE 961>>>

misused in the United States, it remains a standard anxiolytic in many
countries.
Nonbenzodiazepine sedatives such as zolpidem, zaleplon, and eszopiclone
—the so-called Z drugs—have clinical effects similar to the benzodiazepines
and are also subject to misuse and dependence.
Barbiturates were popular before the introduction of
benzodiazepines, but because of their high abuse potential, their use is much
rarer today. Secobarbital was popular in the 1960s through the 1980s. It
acquired many nicknames, including “reds,” “red devils,” “seggies,” and
“downers,” among many others. Pentobarbital was also popular, and its
nicknames included “yellow jackets,” “yellows,” and “nembies.” A
secobarbital–amobarbital combination was also widely available, and was
called “reds and blues,” “rainbows,” “double-trouble,” and “tooies.”
Pentobarbital, secobarbital, and amobarbital are now under the same federal
legal controls as morphine.
The first barbiturate, barbital, was introduced in the United States in 1903.
Barbital and phenobarbital, introduced shortly after that, are long-acting
drugs with half-lives of 12 to 24 hours. Amobarbital is an intermediate-acting
barbiturate with a half-life of 6 to 12 hours. Pentobarbital and secobarbital are
short-acting barbiturates with half-lives of 3 to 6 hours. Although barbiturates
are useful and effective sedatives, they are highly lethal, with only ten times
the standard dose producing coma and death.
BARBITURATES.

BARBITURATE-LIKE SUBSTANCES. The most commonly abused barbiturate-like

substance is methaqualone. Various manufacturers produced it in the United
States until being discontinued in 1985. It is often used by young persons
who believe that the substance heightens the pleasure of sexual activity. The
street names for methaqualone include “mandrakes” (from the United
Kingdom preparation Mandrax) and “soapers” (from the brand name Sopor).
“Luding out” (from the brand name Quaalude) means getting high on
methaqualone, often along with alcohol.
Other barbiturate-like substances include meprobamate, a carbamate
derivative that has weak efficacy as an antianxiety agent but has musclerelaxant effects, chloral hydrate, a hypnotic that is highly toxic to the GI
system and when combined with alcohol, is known as a “Mickey Finn”; and




<<<PAGE 1624>>>

Diabetes mellitus
Gastrointestinal disease
Substance use disorders
Parasomnias and Sleep-Related Movement Disorders
Sleepwalking
Obsessive compulsive disorder
Major depression
Nightmare disorder
Posttraumatic stress disorder
Acute stress disorder
Schizophrenia
Anxiety disorders
Personality disorders
Bereavement
Pain
Neurodegenerative disorders
Cardiovascular disease
REM sleep behavior disorder
Narcolepsy
Neurodegenerative disorders
Restless legs syndrome
Depression
Anxiety
Attentional disorders
Iron deficiency
Drug manufacturers must rigorously test prescription medications in
clinical trials; therefore, they hold an advantage over the virtually untested
OTCs. Medication must be proven safe and effective to become FDA
approved.
Most hypnotic medications are approved for short-, not long-term use.
Exceptions include zolpidem-modified release, eszopiclone, and ramelteon,
which the FDA approved for long-term therapy. When properly used,
hypnotics can provide immediate and adequate relief from sleeplessness.




<<<PAGE 1625>>>

Insomnia, however, usually returns upon discontinuation of dosing.
The clinical practice guideline from the American Academy of Sleep
Medicine recommends the use of suvorexant, eszopiclone, zaleplon,
zolpidem, triazolam, temazepam, ramelteon, and doxepin for the treatment of
insomnia (with specific agents having different indications for sleep-onset or
sleep-maintenance insomnia). They recommend against the use of trazodone,
tiagabine, diphenhydramine, melatonin, tryptophan, and valerian for
insomnia treatment.
Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy for Insomnia. Cognitive-behavioral
therapy for insomnia (CBTi), as a treatment modality, uses a combination of
behavioral and cognitive techniques to overcome dysfunctional sleep
behaviors, misperceptions, and distorted, disruptive thoughts about sleep.
Behavioral techniques include universal sleep hygiene, stimulus control
therapy, sleep restriction therapy, relaxation therapies, and biofeedback.
Studies repeatedly show significant, sustained improvement in sleep
symptoms, including number and duration of awakenings and sleep latency,
from CBTi. Short-term benefits are similar to that of medication, but CBTi
tends to have lasting benefits, even 36 months after treatment. With the
cessation of the medication, insomnia frequently returns and is sometimes
accompanied by rebound insomnia. CBTi has no apparent adverse effects.
There are no established “best practice” guidelines for length or quantity of
sessions. CBTi, however, is not without limitations. Most data do not
compare the efficacy of the individual components of CBTi. However, sleep
hygiene education alone produces an insignificant effect on sleep. Intuitively,
the multicomponent approach addresses many of the variables contributing to
insomnia. Other limitations of CBTi include lack of or unavailability of
trained specialists, cost of sessions, and noncoverage by insurance carriers.
The effects of CBTi take longer to emerge than the effects of medications.
Usually, when patients finally come for treatment of their insomnia, they are
desperate. It is challenging to convince them to try a therapy that may take
several weeks before it will provide relief. Furthermore, patients do not
assume a passive role in this type of therapy; they must be active participants.
Many individuals not only want a “quick fix,” but they also want to undergo
a procedure or have something administered rather than be involved in the
therapeutic process. For optimal CBTi, patients must commit to come to




<<<PAGE 1904>>>

prescriptions for small quantities, this practice passes along increased copay
costs to the patient. Many pharmacy benefit management programs
encourage the prescribing of a 3-month supply of medication.
Table 21-7
Sedative-Hypnotics Cited by the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration
Drug

Manufacturer

Zolpidem (Ambien/Ambien CR)

Sanofi Aventis

Butabarbital (Butisol Sodium)

MedPointe Pharmaceuticals

Pentobarbital and carbromal (Carbrital) Parke-Davis
Flurazepam (Dalmane)

Valeant Pharmaceuticals

Quazepam (Doral)

Questcor Pharmaceuticals

Triazolam (Halcion)

Pfizer

Eszopiclone (Lunesta)

Sepracor

Ethchlorvynol (Placidyl)

Abbott

Estazolam (Prosom)

Abbott

Temazepam (Restoril)

Tyco Healthcare

Ramelteon (Rozerem)

Takeda

Secobarbital (Seconal)

Lilly

Zaleplon (Sonata)

King Pharmaceuticals

In cases in which suicide is a significant concern, an attempt should be
made to verify that the medication is not being hoarded for a later overdose
attempt. Random pill counts or asking a family member to dispense daily
doses may be helpful. Some patients attempt suicide just as they are
beginning to recover. Large quantities of medications with a low therapeutic
index should be prescribed judiciously. Another reason to limit the number of




<<<PAGE 2112>>>

agents for children.

21.4 Anxiolytics
BENZODIAZEPINES AND DRUGS ACTING ON GABA
RECEPTORS
The first benzodiazepine to be introduced was chlordiazepoxide (Librium), in
1959. In 1963, diazepam (Valium) became available. Over the next three
decades, superior safety and tolerability helped the benzodiazepines replace
the older antianxiety and hypnotic medications, such as the barbiturates and
meprobamate (Miltown). Dozens of benzodiazepines and drugs acting on
benzodiazepine receptors have been synthesized and marketed worldwide.
Many of these agents are not available in the United States. Also, some
benzodiazepines have been discontinued because of a lack of use. Table 2143 lists agents currently available in the United States.
The benzodiazepines derive their name from their molecular structure.
They share a common effect on receptors that have been termed
benzodiazepine receptors, which in turn modulate GABA activity.
Nonbenzodiazepine agonists, such as zolpidem (Ambien), zaleplon (Sonata),
and eszopiclone (Lunesta), are similar to these drugs as they bind at a
location close to the benzodiazepine receptor. However, we discuss these
with the medications for insomnia. Flumazenil (Romazicon), a
benzodiazepine receptor antagonist used to reverse benzodiazepine-induced
sedation and in emergency care of benzodiazepine overdosage, is also
covered here.
Because benzodiazepines have a rapid anxiolytic sedative effect, they are
most commonly used for acute treatment of insomnia, anxiety, agitation, or
anxiety associated with any psychiatric disorder. Also, the benzodiazepines
are used as anesthetics, anticonvulsants, and muscle relaxants and as the
preferred treatment for catatonia. Because of the risk of psychological and
physical dependence associated with long-term use of benzodiazepines,
ongoing assessment should be made as to the continued clinical need for
these drugs in treating patients. In most patients, given the nature of their




<<<PAGE 2134>>>

BARBITURATES AND SIMILARLY ACTING DRUGS
The first barbiturate to be used in medicine was barbital (Veronal), which
was introduced in 1903. It was followed by phenobarbital (Luminal),
amobarbital (Amytal), pentobarbital (Nembutal), secobarbital (Seconal), and
thiopental (Pentothal). Many others have been synthesized, but only a
handful have been used clinically (Table 21-48). Many problems are
associated with these drugs, including high abuse and addiction potential, a
narrow therapeutic range with low therapeutic index, and unfavorable side
effects. The use of barbiturates and similar compounds such as meprobamate
(Miltown) has practically been eliminated by the benzodiazepines and
hypnotics, such as zolpidem (Ambien), eszopiclone (Lunesta), and zaleplon
(Sonata), which have a lower abuse potential and a higher therapeutic index
than the barbiturates. Nevertheless, barbiturates still have a role in the
treatment of certain mental and convulsive disorders.
Pharmacologic Actions
The barbiturates are well absorbed after oral administration. The binding of
barbiturates to plasma proteins is high, but lipid solubility varies. The
individual barbiturates are metabolized by the liver and excreted by the
kidneys. The half-lives of specific barbiturates range from 1 to 120 hours.
The barbiturates may also induce hepatic enzymes (cytochrome P450, CYP),
thereby reducing the levels of both the barbiturate and any other concurrently
administered drugs metabolized by the liver. The mechanism of action of
barbiturates involves the GABA receptor–benzodiazepine receptor–chloride
ion channel complex.
Therapeutic Indications
Electroconvulsive Therapy. Methohexital (Brevital) is commonly used
as an anesthetic agent for ECT. It has lower cardiac risks than other
barbiturate anesthetics. Used intravenously (IV), methohexital produces rapid
unconsciousness, and because of its rapid redistribution, it has a brief
duration of action (5 to 7 minutes). Typical dosing for ECT is 0.7 to 1.2
mg/kg. Methohexital can also be used to abort prolonged seizures in ECT or
to limit postictal agitation.




<<<PAGE 2142>>>

when used for conscious sedation, but it has a potential for acute adverse
effects, including respiratory depression, apnea, and bradyarrhythmias, and
the prolonged infusion can cause acidosis and mitochondrial myopathies. The
carrier used for the infusion is a soybean emulsion that can be a culture
medium for various organisms. Also, the carrier can impair macrophage
function and cause hematologic and lipid abnormalities and anaphylactic
reactions.
Etomidate. Etomidate is a carboxylated imidazole that acts at the β2 and β3
subunits of the GABAA receptor. It has a rapid onset (1 minute) and short
duration (less than 5 minutes) of action. The propylene glycol vehicle has
been linked to hyperosmolar metabolic acidosis. It has both proconvulsant
and anticonvulsant properties, and it inhibits cortisol release, with possible
adverse consequences after long-term use. It has been used in anesthesia as it
is unlikely to affect blood pressure, however it has largely been replaced by
newer medications.

21.5 Drugs Used to Treat Sleep Disorders
NONBENZODIAZEPINE GABA AGONISTS
Several of the benzodiazepines are commonly used for sleep, such as
flurazepam, temazepam, quazepam, estazolam, and triazolam. Temazepam,
flurazepam, and triazolam are benzodiazepines used for insomnia; these are
discussed with the other benzodiazepines under the anxiolytic section.
Nonbenzodiazepine agonists, such as zolpidem (Ambien), zaleplon (Sonata),
and eszopiclone (Lunesta)—the so-called “Z drugs”—are similar to these
drugs as they bind at a location close to the benzodiazepine receptor
Pharmacologic Action
Zaleplon, zolpidem, and eszopiclone are structurally distinct and vary in their
binding to the GABA receptor subunits. Benzodiazepines activate all three
specific GABA–benzodiazepine (GABA–BZ) binding sites of the GABAAreceptor, which opens chloride channels and reduces the rate of neuronal and




<<<PAGE 2143>>>

muscle firing. Zolpidem, zaleplon, and eszopiclone have selectivity for
specific subunits of the GABA receptor. This specificity may account for
their selective sedative effects and relative lack of muscle relaxant and
anticonvulsant effects.
Zolpidem, zaleplon, and eszopiclone are rapidly and well absorbed after
oral administration, although absorption can be delayed by as long as 1 hour
if they are taken with food. Zolpidem reaches peak plasma concentrations in
1.6 hours and has a half-life of 2.6 hours. Zaleplon reaches peak plasma
concentrations in 1 hour and has a half-life of 1 hour. Eszopiclone reaches
peak plasma concentrations in 1 hour. If taken immediately after a high-fat or
heavy meal, the peak is delayed by approximately 1 hour, reducing the
effects of eszopiclone on sleep onset. The terminal-phase elimination half-life
is approximately 6 hours in healthy adults. Eszopiclone is weakly bound to
plasma protein (52 to 59 percent).
The rapid metabolism and lack of active metabolites of zolpidem, zaleplon,
and eszopiclone avoid the accumulation of plasma concentrations compared
with the long-term use of benzodiazepines such as flurazepam or diazepam.
Flumazenil for Benzodiazepine Overdosage. Similar to the
benzodiazepines, flumazenil can reverse the adverse psychomotor, amnestic,
and sedative effects of zolpidem and zaleplon.
Therapeutic Indications
Insomnia. Zolpidem, zaleplon, and eszopiclone are also indicated only for
insomnia. Although these “Z drugs” are not usually associated with rebound
insomnia after the discontinuation of their use for short periods, some
patients experience increased sleep difficulties the first few nights after
discontinuing their use. The use of zolpidem, zaleplon, and eszopiclone for
periods more extended than 1 month is not associated with the delayed
emergence of adverse effects. No development of tolerance to any parameter
of sleep measurement was observed over 6 months in clinical trials of
eszopiclone.
γ-Hydroxybutyrate (GHB, Xyrem), which is approved for the treatment of
narcolepsy and improves slow-wave sleep, is also an agonist at the GABAA
receptor, where it binds to specific GHB receptors. GHB has the capacity




<<<PAGE 2144>>>

both to reduce drug craving and to induce dependence, abuse, and absence
seizures as a result of complex actions on tegmental dopaminergic systems.
Parkinson Disease. A small number of persons with idiopathic Parkinson
disease respond to long-term use of zolpidem with reduced bradykinesia and
rigidity. Zolpidem dosages of 10 mg four times daily may be tolerated
without sedation for several years.
Precautions and Adverse Reactions
Zolpidem and zaleplon are generally well tolerated. At zolpidem dosages of
10 mg/day and zaleplon dosages above 10 mg/day, a small number of persons
will experience dizziness, drowsiness, dyspepsia, or diarrhea. Zolpidem and
zaleplon are secreted in breast milk and are therefore contraindicated for use
by nursing mothers. The dosage of zolpidem and zaleplon should be reduced
in elderly persons and persons with hepatic impairment.
Zolpidem (Ambien) has been associated with automatic behavior and
amnesia. In rare cases, zolpidem may cause hallucinations and behavioral
changes. The coadministration of zolpidem and SSRIs may extend the
duration of hallucinations in susceptible patients. Eszopiclone exhibits a
dose–response relationship in elderly adults for the side effects of pain, dry
mouth, and unpleasant taste.
Zolpidem and zaleplon can produce a mild withdrawal syndrome lasting 1
day after prolonged use at higher therapeutic dosages. Rarely, a person taking
zolpidem has self-titrated up the daily dosage to 30 to 40 mg a day. Abrupt
discontinuation of such a high dosage of zolpidem may cause withdrawal
symptoms for 4 or more days. Tolerance does not develop to the sedative
effects of zolpidem and zaleplon.
Drug Interactions
These agents are most dangerous when used with other CNS depressants,
such as alcohol, barbituates, opioids, and similar drugs. Cimetidine increases
the plasma concentrations of zaleplon.
Rifampin (Rifadin), phenytoin (Dilantin), carbamazepine, and
phenobarbital (Solfoton, Luminal) significantly increase the metabolism of
zaleplon.




<<<PAGE 2145>>>

The CYP3A4 and CYP2E1 enzymes are involved in the metabolism of
eszopiclone. Eszopiclone did not show any inhibitory potential on CYP450
1A2, 2A6, 2C9, 2C19, 2D6, 2E1, and 3A4 in cryopreserved human
hepatocytes.
Laboratory Interferences
No known laboratory interferences are associated with the use of zolpidem
and zaleplon.
Dosage and Clinical Guidelines
Zaleplon is available in 5- and 10-mg capsules. A single 10-mg dose is the
usual adult dose. The dose can be increased to a maximum of 20 mg as
tolerated. A single dose of zaleplon can be expected to provide 4 hours of
sleep with minimal residual impairment. For persons older than age 65 years
or persons with hepatic impairment, an initial dose of 5 mg is advised.
Eszopiclone is available in 1-, 2-, and 3-mg tablets. The starting dose
should not exceed 1 mg in patients with severe hepatic impairment or those
taking potent CYP3A4 inhibitors. The recommended dosing to improve sleep
onset or maintenance is 2 or 3 mg for adult patients (ages 18 to 64 years) and
2 mg for older adult patients (ages 65 years and older). The 1-mg dose is for
sleep onset in older adult patients whose primary complaint is difficulty
falling asleep.
Zolpidem is available in 5- and 10-mg capsules, and 6.25- and 12.5-mg
capsules for the controlled-release capsules. There is also a sublingual tablet
and an oropharyngeal spray. The controlled-release form is usually for
problems with sleep maintenance. The sublingual and oropharyngeal forms
are for difficulties with taking the pill, or in particular circumstances. For
example, the sublingual can be used for middle of the night awakening. With
the oral capsule, the starting dose is 5 mg for females and 5 to 10 mg for
males before bedtime. A single 10-mg dose is the usual adult dose (6.25- or
12.5-mg of the controlled release). The capsule should only be taken at the
beginning of the night, as the drug can impair a person if they attempt activity
within 7 to 8 hours of using the drug. For persons older than age 65 years or
persons who are medically frail, 5 mg is the recommended dose.




<<<PAGE 2279>>>

primary care. Prim Care Companion J Clin Psychiatry. 2007;9(1):25–31.
Mahajan B, Kaushal S, Chopra SC. Ramelteon: a new melatonin receptor
agonist. J Anaesth Clin Pharmacol. 2008;24(4):463.
Mundey K, Benloucif S, Harsanyi K, Dubocovich ML, Zee PC. Phasedependent treatment of delayed sleep phase syndrome with melatonin.
Sleep. 2005;28(10):
1271–1278.
Najib J. Eszopiclone, a nonbenzodiazepine sedative-hypnotic agent for the
treatment of transient and chronic insomnia. Clin Ther. 2006;28:490–516.
Natural Standard Research Collaboration. Melatonin. Medline Plus—Herbs
and
Supplements.
2007.
Available
at
http://www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/druginfo/natural/patientmelatonin.html.
Norris ER, Karen B, Correll JR, Zemanek KJ, Lerman J, Primelo RA,
Kaufmann MW. A double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled trial of
adjunctive ramelteon for the treatment of insomnia and mood stability in
patients with euthymic bipolar disorder. J Affect Disord.2013;144(1–
2):141–147.
Roth T, Seiden D, Sainati S, Wang-Weigand S, Zhang J. Effects of ramelteon
on patient-reported sleep latency in older adults with chronic insomnia.
Sleep Med. 2006;7(4):312–318.
Roth T, Stubbs C, Walsh JK. Ramelteon (TAK-375), a selective MT1/MT2receptor agonist, reduces latency to persistent sleep in a model of transient
insomnia related to a novel sleep environment. Sleep. 2005;28(3):303–307.
Scharf MB, Lankford A. Melatonin receptor agonists: ramelteon and
melatonin. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s
Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Vol. 2. Philadelphia, PA:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:3145.
Srinivasan V, Ohta Y, Espino J, Pariente JA, Rodriguez AB, Mohamed M,
Zakaria R. Metabolic syndrome, its pathophysiology and the role of
melatonin. Recent Pat Endocr Metab Immune Drug Discov. 2013;7(1):11–
25.
Turek FW, Gillette MU. Melatonin, sleep, and circadian rhythms: rationale
for development of specific melatonin agonists. Sleep Med. 2004;5(6):523.
Zammit G, Erman M, Wang-Weigand S, Sainati S, Zhang J. Evaluation of




<<<PAGE 3652>>>

Essential fatty acids, 977
Estrogen replacement therapy, 239
Estrogens, neural activity and, 981–982
Eszopiclone, 679
Ethchlorvynol, 298
Ethical conflicts, 829
Ethical dilemmas, 829
Ethics
basic principles of, 829–830
autonomy, 829
beneficence, 829
justice, 829–830
nonmaleficence, 829
codes of, 829
impaired physicians, 832
issues related to, 830
confidentiality, violations of, 831
illegal activities, 830
mistreatment of patient, 830
nonsexual boundary violations, 830–831
sexual boundary violations, 830
in managed care, 831
cooperate with utilization reviewers, 831–832
exercise appeal rights, 831
responsibility to disclose, 831
responsibility to treat, 831
Physician Charter on Professionalism, 832, 833t
physicians in training, 832
professional, 829
in psychiatry, 829–834
questions and answers, 832, 833–834t
Ethnicity, 1047
Ethological studies, attachment, 938
Ethology, 1042–1043
Ethosuximide, for absence (petit mal) seizures, 253
Ethyl alcohol, 285
Etomidate, 679


