<<<PAGE 1304>>>

suggest that they be mostly limited to short-term use, either as an adjunct to
SSRIs during the initial treatment phase or for acute use during exacerbations
of the anxiety. Generally, most guidelines recommend that we should only
consider long-term benzodiazepines for patients who do not respond or
cannot tolerate the SSRIs. The main concerns are the potential for
dependence, as well as the cognitive and other side effects. Tolerance to the
anxiolytic effects does not seem to develop.
Antipsychotics and anticonvulsants are not recommended as initial therapy
but may have some role for treatment-resistant patients. Among them,
quetiapine is popular and may be useful as a second-line treatment for
generalized anxiety disorder.
Buspirone is an azapirone, and effective for the treatment of generalized
anxiety disorders. It is given in three divided doses during the day. The time
to effect is similar to that for antidepressants, several weeks, and may take as
long as several months. It may be useful as an adjunct to antidepressants for
other anxiety disorders; however, most of the evidence is anecdotal.
β-Blockers, such as propranolol, are sometimes used for anxiety disorders,
particularly social anxiety disorder. However, the available evidence does not
support this use. Anecdotally, many consider it useful for social anxiety,
particularly performance anxiety. The presumed mechanism is the drug’s
ability to block many of the physiologic symptoms of anxiety. However,
there is little data to support this, and at least one study showed no effect.
One study concluded it might be useful for performance anxiety—
specifically musical performances—however, it also had significant side
effects that could impair performance.
Antihistamines, such as hydroxyzine, are also used, particularly as
alternatives to benzodiazepines for acute treatment. It has some evidence for
its use in generalized anxiety disorder. We know little about its long-term
effect.
Table 8-6 lists the common classes of drugs used for anxiety disorders and
the evidence supporting their use.
Treatment Approach. Table 8-7 gives some pointers for using
medications to treat patients with anxiety.
For most anxiety disorders, a conservative approach is, to begin with, an
SSRI. Benzodiazepines are most useful when a patient requires rapid control




<<<PAGE 1436>>>

Electroconvulsive therapy (for refractory depression with persistent
melancholic features across all dissociative identity disorder
alters)
Mood stabilizers (more useful for PTSD and anxiety than mood
swings)
Divalproex
Lamotrigine
Oral or intramuscular benzodiazepines
Medications for sleep problems
Low-dose trazodone
Low-dose mirtazapine
Low-dose tricyclic antidepressants
Low-dose neuroleptics
Benzodiazepines (often less helpful for sleep problems in this
population)
Zolpidem
Anticholinergic agents (diphenhydramine, hydroxyzine)
Medications for self-injury, addictions
Naltrexone
Brainwashing
There are no empirical treatment studies of individuals subjected to extreme
coercion applied in the service of indoctrination into a belief system or an
attempt at identity alteration. The basic principles of phased trauma treatment
would seem to provide an organizing framework for their care, as for victims
of other forms of torture. Family and social interventions may be necessary
because of the duress and disruption accompanying the precipitating events
and the social effects of the profound changes in the patient’s attitudes,
behaviors, and beliefs, as well as sequestration from everyday events during
the period of captivity.
Ganser Syndrome
No systematic treatment studies have been conducted, given the rarity of this
condition. In most case reports, the patient has been hospitalized and
provided with a protective and supportive environment. In some instances,




<<<PAGE 2215>>>

and as hypnotics and anxiolytics. Diphenhydramine (Benadryl) is used to
treat neuroleptic-induced parkinsonism and neuroleptic-induced acute
dystonia and sometimes as a hypnotic. Hydroxyzine hydrochloride (Atarax)
and hydroxyzine pamoate (Vistaril) are used as anxiolytics. Promethazine
(Phenergan) is used for its sedative and anxiolytic effects. Cyproheptadine
(Periactin) has been used for the treatment of anorexia nervosa and inhibited
male and female orgasms caused by serotonergic agents. The antihistamines
most commonly used in psychiatry are listed in Table 21-58. Secondgeneration, “nonsedating” H1 blockers, such as fexofenadine (Allegra),
loratadine (Claritin), and cetirizine (Zyrtec) are less commonly used in
psychiatric practice. The H2-receptor antagonists, such as cimetidine, work
primarily on gastric mucosa, inhibiting gastric secretion.
Table 21-59 lists antihistaminic drugs not used in psychiatry, but that may
have psychiatric adverse effects or drug–drug interactions.
Pharmacologic Actions
The H1 antagonists used in psychiatry are well absorbed from the GI tract.
The antiparkinsonian effects of intramuscular (IM) diphenhydramine have
their onset in 15 to 30 minutes and the sedative effects of diphenhydramine
peak in 1 to 3 hours. The sedative effects of hydroxyzine and promethazine
begin after 20 to 60 minutes and last for 4 to 6 hours. Because all three drugs
are metabolized in the liver, persons with hepatic disease, such as cirrhosis,
may attain high plasma concentrations with long-term administration.
Cyproheptadine is well absorbed after oral administration, and its metabolites
are excreted in the urine.
Table 21-58
Histamine Antagonists Commonly Used in Psychiatry
Generic Name

Trade Name

Duration of Action (hr)

Diphenhydramine

Benadryl

4–6

Hydroxyzine

Atarax, Vistaril

6–24

Promethazine

Phenergan

4–6




<<<PAGE 2218>>>

depressants, such as alcohol, other sedative-hypnotic drugs, and many
psychotropic drugs, including tricyclic drugs and DRAs. Anticholinergic
activity can be cumulative when using other anticholinergic drugs and may
sometimes result in severe anticholinergic symptoms or intoxication.
Laboratory Interferences
H1 antagonists may eliminate the wheal and induration that form the basis of
allergy skin tests. Promethazine may interfere with pregnancy tests and may
increase blood glucose concentrations. Diphenhydramine may yield a falsepositive urine test result for phencyclidine (PCP). Hydroxyzine use can
falsely elevate the results of specific tests for urinary 17hydroxycorticosteroids.
Dosage and Clinical Guidelines
The antihistamines are available in a variety of preparations (Table 21-60).
IM injections should be deep because superficial administration can cause
local irritation.
Table 21-60
Dosage and
Antagonists

Administration

of

Common

Histamine

Medication

Route

Preparation

Common Dosage

Diphenhydramine
(Benadryl)

PO

Capsules and
tablets: 25
mg, 50 mg

Adults: 25–50 mg
three to four times
per day

Liquid: 12.5
mg/5.0 mL

Children: 5 mg/kg
three to four times
per day, not to
exceed 300
mg/day

Deep
Solution: 10 or
IM or
50 mg/mL
IV

Same as oral




<<<PAGE 2219>>>

Hydroxyzine
Hydrochloride
(Atarax)

PO

Tablets: 10, 25, Adults: 50–100 mg
50, and 100
three to four times
mg
daily
Syrup: 10 mg/5
mL

Children younger
than 6 yr of age: 2
mg/kg/day in
divided doses
Children older than 6
yr of age: 12.5–
25.0 mg three to
four times daily

Hydroxyzine
Pamoate
(Vistaril)

IM

Solution: 25 or
50 mg/mL

Same as oral

PO

Suspension: 25 Same as dosages for
mg/mL
hydroxyzine
hydrochloride
Capsules: 25,
50, and 100
mg

Promethazine
(Phenergan)

PO

Tablets: 15.2,
25.0, and
50.0 mg

Adults: 50–100 mg
three to four times
daily for sedation

Syrup: 3.25
mg/5 mL

Children: 12.5–25.0
mg at night for
sedation

Rectal

Suppositories:
12.5, 25.0,
and 50.0 mg

IM

Solution: 25 and
50 mg/mL




<<<PAGE 2220>>>

Cyproheptadine
(Periactin)

PO

Tablets: 4 mg

Adults: 4–20 mg/day

Syrup: 2 mg/5
mL

Children 2–7 yr of
age: 2 mg two to
three times daily
(maximum, 12
mg/day)
Children 7–14 yr of
age: 4 mg two to
three times daily
(maximum of 16
mg/day)

IM, intramuscular; IV, intravenous; PO, oral.

Intravenous (IV) administration of 25 to 50 mg of diphenhydramine is an
effective treatment for neuroleptic-induced acute dystonia, which may
immediately disappear. Treatment with 25 mg three times a day—up to 50
mg four times a day, if necessary—can be used to treat neuroleptic-induced
parkinsonism, akinesia, and buccal movements. Diphenhydramine can be
used as a hypnotic at a 50-mg dose for mild transient insomnia. Doses of 100
mg are not superior to doses of 50 mg, but they produce more anticholinergic
effects than doses of 50 mg.
Hydroxyzine is most commonly used as a short-term anxiolytic.
Hydroxyzine should not be given IV because it is irritating to the blood
vessels. Dosages of 50 to 100 mg given orally four times a day for long-term
treatment or 50 to 100 mg IM every 4 to 6 hours for short-term treatment are
usually effective.
SSRI-induced anorgasmia may sometimes be reversed with 4 to 16 mg a
day of cyproheptadine taken by mouth 1 or 2 hours before anticipated sexual
activity. Several case reports and small studies have also reported that
cyproheptadine may be of some use in the treatment of eating disorders, such
as anorexia nervosa. Cyproheptadine is available in 4-mg tablets and a 2mg/5-mL solution. Children and elderly patients are more sensitive to the
effects of antihistamines than are young adults.


