<<<PAGE 881>>>

term behavioral change (rehabilitation); whether the program makes
extensive use of pharmacologic interventions; and whether the program
mainly uses individual therapy, Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) or other 12step principles, or therapeutic community principles. For example, the
National Institute on Drug Abuse suggested the following categories of
treatment: long-term residential treatment, short-term residential treatment,
outpatient treatment programs, individualized drug counseling, group
counseling, and treatments for individuals involved in the criminal justice
system.
Selecting a Treatment
Not all interventions apply to all types of substance use disorders, and some
of the more coercive interventions used for illicit drugs do not apply to legal
substances, such as tobacco. Addictive behaviors do not change abruptly but
through a series of stages. Experts propose five stages in this gradual process:
precontemplation, contemplation, preparation, action, and maintenance. For
some types of addictions, the therapeutic alliance improves when the
treatment approach is tailored to the patient’s stage of readiness to change.
Interventions for some drug use disorders may have a specific pharmacologic
agent as a critical component; for example, disulfiram, naltrexone, or
acamprosate for alcoholism; methadone, levomethadyl acetate, or
buprenorphine for heroin addiction; and nicotine delivery devices,
varenicline, or bupropion for tobacco dependence.
In general, brief interventions (e.g., a few weeks of detoxification, whether
in or out of a hospital) used for persons who are severely dependent on illicit
opioids have limited effect on outcome measured a few months later.
Substantial reductions in illicit drug use, antisocial behaviors, and psychiatric
distress among patients dependent on cocaine or heroin are much more likely
following treatment lasting at least 3 months. Such a time-in-treatment effect
occurs across very different modalities, from residential therapeutic
communities to ambulatory methadone maintenance programs. Although
some patients appear to benefit from a few days or weeks of treatment, a
substantial percentage of users of illicit drugs drop out (or are dropped) from
treatment before they have achieved significant benefits.
Treatment outcomes vary widely; this is partly due to the great variety of




<<<PAGE 914>>>

Interventions) demonstrated that naltrexone improves clinical outcomes, and
a Cochrane review of naltrexone concluded that naltrexone was effective in
reducing heavy drinking days. The typical dose is 50 mg/day, and side effects
include mild GI upset and lethargy.
The second medication, acamprosate, antagonizes neuronal overactivity
related to the excitatory neurotransmitter glutamate, at least in part, by acting
as an antagonist to N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptors. Acamprosate
may diminish mild anxiety, mood swings, and other sleep difficulties
associated with the protracted withdrawal syndrome observed after the first 4
to 5 days of abstinence. The typical dose is about 2,000 mg divided into three
doses per day and is associated with relatively mild side effects of GI
problems such as diarrhea.
A third possible drug of interest is the alcohol-sensitizing agent disulfiram.
Disulfiram is given in daily doses of 250 mg before discharging the patient
from the intensive first phase of outpatient rehabilitation or inpatient care.
The goal is to place the patient in a condition in which drinking alcohol
precipitates an uncomfortable physical reaction, including nausea, vomiting,
and a burning sensation in the face and stomach. Few data support
disulfiram’s effectiveness, most likely because patients stop it when they
resume drinking. Many clinicians have stopped routinely prescribing the
agent, partly in recognition of the dangers associated with the drug itself:
mood swings, rare instances of psychosis, the possibility of increased
peripheral neuropathies, the relatively rare occurrence of other significant
neuropathies, and potentially fatal hepatitis. Moreover, we should not give
disulfiram to patients with preexisting heart disease, cerebral thrombosis,
diabetes, and some other conditions, because an alcohol reaction to the
disulfiram could be fatal.
Table 4-15 gives a summary of medications used for alcohol dependence.
Two other medications, while not yet approved for the treatment of alcohol
use disorders, are worth brief mention. Several studies using the
anticonvulsant topiramate have reported improvement in drinking patterns.
Additionally, some data suggest that the 5-HT3 ondansetron might be
beneficial in alcohol use disorder treatment. No evidence exists that
antidepressant medications, such as selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
(SSRIs), lithium, or antipsychotic medications, are significantly effective in




<<<PAGE 916>>>

Medications for Treating Alcohol Dependence

Action

Naltrexone

Acamprosate

Disulfiram

Blocks opioid
receptors,
resulting in
reduced
craving and
reduced
reward in
response to
drinking

Not well
Inhibits
understood.
intermediate
Likely an NMDA
metabolism of
receptor
alcohol,
antagonist and
causing a
positive allosteric
buildup of
modulator of
acetaldehyde
GABAa receptors
and a reaction
of flushing,
sweating,
nausea, and
tachycardia if a
patient drinks
alcohol

Contraindications Currently using Severe renal
Concomitant use
opioids or in
impairment (CrCl
of alcohol or
acute opioid
≤30 mL/min)
alcoholwithdrawal;
containing
anticipated
preparations or
need for
metronidazole;
opioid
coronary artery
analgesics;
disease; severe
acute
myocardial
hepatitis or
disease
liver failure
Precautions

Other hepatic
disease;
renal
impairment;
history of

Moderate renal
High impulsivity—
impairment
likely to drink
(dose
while using it;
adjustment for
psychoses
CrCl between 30
(current or




<<<PAGE 918>>>

dizziness;
headache;
anxiety;
fatigue

headache; back
pain; infection;
flu syndrome;
chills;
somnolence;
decreased libido;
amnesia;
confusion

Examples of drug Opioid
No clinically
interactions
analgesics
relevant
(blocks
interactions
action);
known
yohimbine
(use with
naltrexone
increases
negative drug
effects)

Usual adult
dosage

Amitriptyline;
anticoagulants
such as
warfarin;
diazepam;
isoniazid;
metronidazole;
phenytoin;
theophylline;
warfarin; any
nonprescription
drug-containing
alcohol

Oral dose: 50
Oral dose: 666 mg Oral dose: 250
mg daily
(two 333-mg
mg daily (range
before
tablets) three
125–500 mg)
prescribing:
times daily or, for
before
evaluate for
patients with
prescribing:
possible
moderate renal
warn that the
current opioid
impairment (CrCl
patient should
use; consider
30–50 mL/min),
not take
a urine
reduce to 333
disulfiram for at
toxicology
mg (one tablet)
least 12 hr after
screen for
three times daily
drinking and
opioids,
before
that a
including
prescribing:
disulfiramsynthetic
establish
alcohol reaction




<<<PAGE 923>>>

alcohol can remain unabsorbed in the stomach for hours. Furthermore,
pylorospasm often results in nausea and vomiting.
Once the bloodstream absorbs the alcohol, it distributes to all body tissues.
Alcohol uniformly dissolves in the body’s water, so tissues containing a high
proportion of water receive a high concentration of alcohol. The intoxicating
effects are more significant for a given blood alcohol concentration when the
concentration is rising than when it is falling (the Mellanby effect). For this
reason, the rate of absorption bears directly on the intoxication response.
Metabolism. Hepatic oxidation accounts for about 90 percent of alcohol
metabolism. The remaining 10 percent is excreted unchanged by the kidneys
and lungs. The rate of oxidation by the liver is constant and independent of
the body’s energy requirements. The body can metabolize about 15 mg/dL
per hour, with a range of 10 to 34 mg/dL per hour. That is, the average person
oxidizes three-fourths of an ounce of 40 percent (80 proof) alcohol in an
hour. In persons with a history of excessive alcohol consumption,
upregulation of the necessary enzymes results in rapid alcohol metabolism.
Two enzymes metabolize alcohol: alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH) and
aldehyde dehydrogenase. ADH catalyzes the conversion of alcohol into
acetaldehyde, which is a toxic compound; aldehyde dehydrogenase catalyzes
the conversion of acetaldehyde into acetic acid. Disulfiram inhibits aldehyde
dehydrogenase. Some studies have shown that women have a lower ADH
blood content than men; this fact may account for woman’s tendency to
become more intoxicated than men after drinking the same amount of
alcohol. The decreased function of alcohol-metabolizing enzymes in some
Asian persons can also lead to more rapid intoxication and toxic symptoms.
Alcohol’s Effects on the Brain
Biochemistry. Alcohol has prominent effects on almost all neurochemical
systems, with different actions during intoxication versus withdrawal.
Perhaps the most potent effects are on GABA complexes in the brain,
especially on the GABA-A receptor (GABAA), contributing to the sedating,
sleep-inducing, anticonvulsant, and muscle-relaxing properties of alcohol.
Ethanol also impacts NMDA receptors, with dampened stimulatory effects
during intoxication and heightened activity during withdrawal. Alcohol




<<<PAGE 989>>>

that chronic cocaine use alters the function of multiple neurotransmitter
systems, especially the dopaminergic and serotonergic transmitters regulating
hedonic tone, and that cocaine induces a state of relative dopaminergic
deficiency. Although the evidence for such alterations in dopaminergic
function has been growing, it has been challenging to demonstrate that agents
theoretically capable of modifying dopamine function can alter the course of
treatment.
Tricyclic antidepressant drugs yielded some positive results when used
early in treatment with minimally drug-dependent patients; however, they are
of little or no use inducing abstinence in moderate or severe cases.
Also tried but not confirmed effective in controlled studies are other
antidepressants, such as bupropion, MAOIs, SSRIs, antipsychotics, lithium,
several different calcium channel inhibitors, and anticonvulsants. Several
studies have found increased rates of abstinence with the use of topiramate
for cocaine use disorders; however, there are also negative trials of
topiramate in this population.
Disulfiram has demonstrated potential benefits in the pharmacotherapy of
cocaine use disorder. Disulfiram has long been used in the treatment of
alcohol use disorder because it inhibits an enzyme involved in the
metabolism of ethanol. Though disulfiram was initially considered a potential
treatment option for individuals with both alcohol and cocaine use disorders,
studies demonstrated that disulfiram appears to have a direct effect on the
metabolism of dopamine and cocaine itself; it acts as an inhibitor of
dopamine β-hydroxylase, thereby slowing the breakdown of synaptic
dopamine and increasing dopamine levels. Individuals who are coadministered cocaine and disulfiram describe more negative responses to
cocaine, including anxiety, restlessness, and paranoia. These reactions may,
in part, explain the effects of disulfiram in decreasing cocaine use. Issues
affecting treatment response to disulfiram include challenges with treatment
nonadherence, risks of inducing psychotic symptoms with combined cocaine
and disulfiram use, and risks of serious medical consequences if a patient
were to consume alcohol, given the frequent co-occurrence of alcohol and
cocaine use disorders.

EPIDEMIOLOGY




<<<PAGE 1086>>>

2013;309:243.
Shaffer HJ, Martin R. Disordered gambling: Etiology, trajectory, and clinical
considerations. Annu Rev Clin Psychol. 2011;7:483.
Smetaniuk P. A preliminary investigation into the prevalence and prediction
of problematic cell phone use. J Behav Addict. 2014;3:41–53.
Smith HS, Kirsh KL, Passik SD. Chronic opioid therapy issues associated
with opioid abuse potential. J Opioid Manag. 2009;5:287.
Spiegel D. Trance formations: Hypnosis in brain and body. Depress Anxiety.
2013;30(4):342–352.
Stafford LD, Wright C, Yeomans MR. The drink remains the same: Implicit
positive associations in high but not moderate or non-caffeine users.
Psychol Addict Behav. 2010;24:274.
Strain EC. Chapter 11: Substance-related disorders: Introduction. In: Sadock
BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook
of Psychiatry. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Wolters Kluwer; 2017:1262–
1264.
Suh JJ, Pettinati HM, Kampman KM, O’Brien CP. The status of disulfiram: a
half of a century later. J Clin Psychopharmacol. 2006;26:290–302.
Svrakic DM, Lustman PJ, Mallya A, Lynn TA, Finney R, Svrakic NM.
Legalization, decriminalization & medicinal use of cannabis: A scientific
and public health perspective. Mo Med. 2012;109:90.
Tavares H, Zilberman ML, el-Guebaly N. Are there cognitive and
behavioural approaches specific to the treatment of pathological gambling?
Can J Psychiatry. 2003;48:22.
Testa A, Giannuzzi R, Sollazzo F, Petrongolo L, Bernardini L, Dain S.
Psychiatric emergencies (part II): psychiatric disorders coexisting with
organic diseases. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci. 2013;17:65.
Todd G, Noyes C, Flavel SC, Della Vedova CB, Spyropoulos P, Chatterton
B, Berg D, White JM. Illicit stimulant use is associated with abnormal
substantia nigra morphology in humans. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e56438.
Toneatto T, Brands B, Selby P. A randomized, double-blind, placebocontrolled trial of naltrexone in the treatment of concurrent alcohol use
disorder and pathological gambling. Am J Addict. 2009;18:219.
Unger A, Jung E, Winklbaur B, Fischer G. Gender issues in the
pharmacotherapy of opioid-addicted women: Buprenorphine. J Addict Dis.
2010;29:217.




<<<PAGE 1127>>>

or hypothyroidism, panhypopituitarism
Vitamin deficiencies

Vitamin B12 deficiency, folate deficiency,
thiamine deficiency, niacin deficiency

Medications

Adrenocorticotropic hormones, anabolic
steroids, corticosteroids, cimetidine,
antibiotics (cephalosporins, penicillin),
disulfiram, anticholinergic agents

Substances

Amphetamines, cocaine, alcohol, cannabis,
hallucinogens

Toxins

Mercury, arsenic, manganese, thallium

Mood Disorders
A patient with a major depressive episode may present with delusions and
hallucinations, as can a patient with bipolar disorder. Delusions seen with
psychotic depression are typically mood-congruent and involve themes such
as guilt, self-depreciation, deserved punishment, and incurable illnesses. In
mood disorders, psychotic symptoms resolve entirely with the resolution of
depression. A depressive episode that is this severe may also result in loss of
functioning, a decline in self-care, and social isolation, but these are
secondary to the depressive symptoms and should not be confused with the
negative symptoms of schizophrenia.
A full-blown manic episode often presents with delusions and sometimes
hallucinations. Delusions in mania are most often mood-congruent and
typically involve grandiose themes. The flight of ideas seen in mania may, at
times, be confused with the thought disorder of schizophrenia. Special
attention during the mental status examination of a patient with a flight of
ideas is required to note whether the associative links between topics are
conserved. However, the conversation is awkward for the observer to follow
because of the patient’s accelerated rate of thinking.
Personality Disorders
Various personality disorders may have some features of schizophrenia.
Schizotypal, schizoid, and borderline personality disorders are personality




<<<PAGE 1966>>>

Bromocriptine

Antipsychotic antagonizes
dopamine receptor
stimulation

Increased prolactin

Caffeinated
beverages

Form precipitate with
antipsychotic solutions

Possible diminished
antipsychotic
effect

Cimetidine

Reduced antipsychotic
Decreased
absorption and clearance
antipsychotic
effect

Clonidine

Antipsychotic potentiates α- Hypotension or
adrenergic hypotensive
hypertension
effect

Disulfiram

Impairs antipsychotic
metabolism

Increased
antipsychotic
concentrations

Methyldopa

Unknown

BP elevations

Phenytoin

Induction of antipsychotic
metabolism; decreased
phenytoin metabolism

Decreased
antipsychotic
concentrations:
increased
phenytoin levels

SSRIs

Impair antipsychotic
metabolism;
pharmacodynamic
interaction

Sudden onset of
extrapyramidal
symptoms

Valproic acid

Antipsychotic inhibits
Increased valproic
valproic acid metabolism
acid half-life and
levels

ACEI, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor; AD, antidepressant; BP, blood pressure; CNS,
central nervous system; GI, gastrointestinal; SSRI, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor.
From Ereshosky L, Overman GP, Karp JK. Current psychotropic dosing and monitoring
guidelines. Prim Psychiatry. 1996;3:21, with permission.




<<<PAGE 2040>>>

or sympathomimetics
SSRIs, clomipramine, venlafaxine, sibutramine
Sympathomimetics (amphetamines, cocaine, methylphenidate,
dopamine, epinephrine, norepinephrine, isoproterenol,
ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, phenylpropanolamine)
L-Tryptophan
Use Carefully
Anticholinergics
Antihistamines
Disulfiram
Bromocriptine
Hydralazine
Sedative-hypnotics
Terpin hydrate with codeine
Tricyclics and tetracyclics (avoid clomipramine)
SSRI, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor.

When switching from an irreversible MAOI to any other type of
antidepressant drug, persons should wait at least 14 days after the last dose of
the MAOI before beginning the use of the next drug to allow replenishment
of the body’s MAOs. When switching from an antidepressant to an
irreversible MAOI, persons should wait 10 to 14 days (or 5 weeks for
fluoxetine [Prozac]) before starting the use of the MAOI to avoid drug–drug
interactions. In contrast, MAO activity recovers completely 24 to 48 hours
after the last dose of a RIMA.
The effects of the MAOIs on hepatic enzymes are poorly studied.
Tranylcypromine inhibits CYP2C19. Moclobemide inhibits CYP2D6,
CYP2C19, and CYP1A2 and is a substrate for 2C19.
Cimetidine (Tagamet) and fluoxetine significantly reduce the elimination
of moclobemide. Modest doses of fluoxetine and moclobemide administered
concurrently may be well tolerated, with no significant pharmacodynamic or
pharmacokinetic interactions.
Laboratory Interferences
MAOIs may lower blood glucose concentrations. MAOIs artificially raise




<<<PAGE 2107>>>

clonic (grand mal) and complex partial (psychomotor, temporal lobe)
seizures, phenytoin is also used for the treatment of acute mania in bipolar
disorder.
Precautions and Adverse Reactions. The most common adverse
reactions reported with phenytoin therapy are usually dose-related and
include nystagmus, ataxia, slurred speech, decreased coordination, and
mental confusion. Other side effects include dizziness, insomnia, transient
nervousness, motor twitching, and headaches. There have been rare reports of
phenytoin induced dyskinesias, similar to those induced by phenothiazine and
other neuroleptic drugs. More severe side effects include thrombocytopenia,
leukopenia, agranulocytosis, and pancytopenia, with or without bone marrow
suppression.
Several reports have suggested the development of lymphadenopathy
(local or generalized), including benign lymph node hyperplasia,
pseudolymphoma, lymphoma, and Hodgkin’s disease. Prenatal exposure to
phenytoin may increase the risks for congenital malformations, and a
potentially life-threatening bleeding disorder related to decreased levels of
vitamin K–dependent clotting factors may occur in newborns exposed to
phenytoin in utero. Hyperglycemia has been reported with phenytoin use;
also, the agent may increase the serum glucose level in patients with diabetes.
Drug Interactions. Acute alcohol intake, amiodarone, chlordiazepoxide,
cimetidine, diazepam, disulfiram, estrogens, fluoxetine, H2-antagonists,
isoniazid, methylphenidate, phenothiazines, salicylates, and trazodone may
increase phenytoin serum levels. Drugs that may lower phenytoin levels
include carbamazepine, chronic alcohol abuse, and reserpine.
Laboratory Interferences. Phenytoin may decrease serum concentrations
of thyroxine. It may cause increased serum levels of glucose, alkaline
phosphatase, and γ-glutamyl transpeptidase.
Dosage and Clinical Guidelines. Patients may be started on one 100-mg
extended oral capsule three times daily, and the dosage then adjusted to suit
individual requirements. Patients may then be switched to once-a-day dosing,
which is more convenient. In this case, extended-release capsules may be




<<<PAGE 2122>>>

Hyperacusis

Myoclonus

Nausea

Delirium

Difficulty concentrating

Seizures

Drug Interactions
The most common and potentially severe benzodiazepine receptor agonist
interaction is excessive sedation and respiratory depression occurring when
benzodiazepines are administered concomitantly with other CNS depressants,
such as alcohol, barbiturates, tricyclic and tetracyclic drugs, DRAs, opioids,
and antihistamines. Ataxia and dysarthria may be likely to occur when
lithium, antipsychotics, and clonazepam are combined. The combination of
benzodiazepines and clozapine (Clozaril) has been reported to cause delirium
and should be avoided. Cimetidine (Tagamet), disulfiram (Antabuse),
isoniazid, estrogen, and oral contraceptives increase the plasma concentration
of diazepam, chlordiazepoxide, clorazepate, and flurazepam. However,
antacids may reduce the GI absorption of benzodiazepines. The plasma
concentrations of triazolam and alprazolam are increased to potentially toxic
concentrations by nefazodone (Serzone) and fluvoxamine (Luvox).
The manufacturer of nefazodone recommends that the dosage of triazolam
be lowered by 75 percent, and the dosage of alprazolam be lowered by 50
percent, when given concomitantly with nefazodone. Over-the-counter
preparations of the kava plant, advertised as a “natural tranquilizer,” can
potentiate the action of benzodiazepine receptor agonists through synergistic
overactivation of GABA receptors. Carbamazepine can lower the plasma
concentration of alprazolam. Antacids and food may decrease the plasma
concentrations of benzodiazepines, and smoking may increase the
metabolism of benzodiazepines. The benzodiazepines may increase the
plasma concentrations of phenytoin and digoxin (Lanoxin). The SSRIs may
prolong and exacerbate the severity of zolpidem-induced hallucinations.
Deaths have been reported when parental lorazepam is given with parental
olanzapine.
Dosage and Clinical Guidelines




<<<PAGE 2139>>>

abuse among drug addicts.
Disulfiram (Antabuse) inhibits acetaldehyde
dehydrogenase and reduces the metabolism of paraldehyde, leading to a
possible toxic concentration of paraldehyde. Paraldehyde has additive
sedating effects in combination with other CNS depressants such as alcohol
or benzodiazepines.
DRUG

INTERACTIONS.

LABORATORY INTERFERENCES. Paraldehyde can interfere with the metyra-

pone, phentolamine, and urinary 17-hydroxycorticosteroid tests.
DOSING AND CLINICAL GUIDELINES. Paraldehyde is available in 30-mL vials for

oral, IV, or rectal use. For seizures in adults, up to 12 mL (diluted to a 10
percent solution) can be administered by gastric tube every 4 hours. For
children, the oral dose is 0.3 mg/kg.
Meprobamate. Meprobamate, a carbamate, was introduced shortly before
the benzodiazepines, specifically to treat anxiety. It is also used for muscle
relaxant effects.
PHARMACOLOGIC ACTIONS. Meprobamate is rapidly absorbed from the GI

tract and IM injections. It is metabolized primarily by the liver, and a small
portion is excreted unchanged in the urine. The plasma half-life is
approximately 10 hours.
Meprobamate is indicated for the short-term
treatment of anxiety disorders. It has also been used as a hypnotic and is
prescribed as a muscle relaxant.
THERAPEUTIC INDICATIONS.

Meprobamate can cause CNS
depression and death in overdose and carries the risk of abuse by patients
with drug or alcohol use disorders. Abrupt cessation after long-term use can
lead to withdrawal syndrome, including seizures and hallucinations.
Meprobamate can exacerbate acute intermittent porphyria. Other rare side
effects include hypersensitivity reactions, wheezing, hives, paradoxical
excitement, and leukopenia. It should not be used in patients with hepatic
PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS.




<<<PAGE 2182>>>

discussed earlier, including those with opioid agonists associated with drug
abuse as well as those involving antiemetics and antitussives. Because of its
extensive hepatic metabolism, naltrexone may affect or be affected by other
drugs that influence hepatic enzyme levels. However, the clinical importance
of these potential interactions is not known.
One potentially hepatotoxic drug that has been used in some cases with
opioid receptor antagonists is disulfiram (Antabuse). Although no adverse
effects were observed, frequent laboratory monitoring is indicated when such
combination therapy is contemplated. Opioid receptor antagonists have been
reported to potentiate the sedation associated with the use of thioridazine
(Mellaril), an interaction that probably applies equally to all low-potency
DRAs.
Intravenous nalmefene has been administered after benzodiazepines,
inhalational anesthetics, muscle relaxants, and muscle relaxant antagonists
were administered in conjunction with general anesthetics without any
adverse reactions. Care should be taken when using flumazenil (Romazicon)
and nalmefene together because both of these agents have been shown to
induce seizures in preclinical studies.
Laboratory Interferences
The potential for false-positive urine for opiates using less specific urine
screens such as enzyme-multiplied immunoassay technique (EMIT) may
exist, given that naltrexone and nalmefene are derivatives of oxymorphone.
Naltrexone does not interefere with thin-layer, gas-liquid, and high-pressure
liquid chromatographic methods used for the detection of opiates in the urine.
Dosage and Clinical Guidelines
We should take several steps to ensure that the person is opioid-free. These
steps are meant to avoid the possibility of precipitating an acute opioid
withdrawal syndrome. Within a supervised detoxification setting, at least 5
days should elapse after the last dose of short-acting opioids, such as heroin,
hydromorphone (Dilaudid), meperidine (Demerol), or morphine, and at least
10 days should elapse after the last dose of longer-acting opioids, such as
methadone, before opioid antagonists are initiated. Some rapid detoxification
protocols use shorter abstinence periods, however these require special




<<<PAGE 2184>>>

Rapid Detoxification. Rapid detoxification has been standardized using
naltrexone, although nalmefene would be expected to be equally effective
with fewer adverse effects. In rapid detoxification protocols, the addicted
person stops opioid use abruptly and begins the first opioid-free day by
taking clonidine 0.2 mg orally every 2 hours for nine doses, to a maximum
dose of 1.8 mg, during which time the BP is monitored every 30 to 60
minutes for the first 8 hours. Naltrexone 12.5 mg is administered 1 to 3 hours
after the first dose of clonidine. To reduce muscle cramps and later insomnia,
a short-acting benzodiazepine, such as oxazepam 30 to 60 mg, is
administered simultaneously with the first dose of clonidine, and half of the
initial dose is readministered every 4 to 6 hours as needed. The maximum
daily dosage of oxazepam should not exceed 180 mg. The person undergoing
rapid detoxification should be accompanied home by a reliable escort. On the
second day, similar doses of clonidine and the benzodiazepine are
administered but with a single dose of naltrexone 25 mg taken in the
morning. Relatively asymptomatic persons may return home after 3 to 4
hours. Administration of the daily maintenance dose of 50 mg of naltrexone
is begun on the third day, and the dosages of clonidine and the
benzodiazepine are gradually tapered off over 5 to 10 days.

DISULFIRAM AND ACAMPROSATE
Disulfiram (Antabuse) and acamprosate (Campral) are drugs used to treat
alcohol use disorder. Disulfiram has suffered from a reputation as a
dangerous medication only suitable for highly motivated and strictly
supervised drinkers because of the severe physical reactions the drug causes
after drinking. Experience has shown, however, that at recommended doses,
it is an acceptable and safe medication for dependent drinkers seeking to
sustain abstinence. The properties that constitute disulfiram’s main
therapeutic effect (i.e., the ability to produce unpleasant symptoms after
alcohol intake, also known as disulfiram–alcohol reaction) have created that
perception of dangerousness.
In the most severe cases, when disulfiram is combined with alcohol, severe
clinical conditions can occur. These include respiratory depression,
cardiovascular collapse, acute heart failure, convulsions, loss of
consciousness, and death in rare cases. These potential complications, as well




<<<PAGE 2185>>>

as the development of alternative antialcohol medications, have been the
limiting factors for the broader use of disulfiram. Unlike disulfiram,
acamprosate, the other drug discussed in this section, does not produce
aversive side effects. Acamprosate is now prescribed more commonly than
disulfiram in outpatient settings, but disulfiram is prescribed more often in
inpatient settings because it helps facilitate initial abstinence.
Other drugs that are useful in reducing alcohol consumption include
naltrexone (ReVia, Trexan), nalmefene (Revex), topiramate (Topamax), and
gabapentin (Neurontin). These agents are discussed in their respective
sections.
Disulfiram
Pharmacologic Actions. Disulfiram is almost completely absorbed from
the GI tract after oral administration. Its half-life is estimated to be 60 to 120
hours. Therefore, it may take 1 or 2 weeks to eliminate disulfiram from the
body after taking the last dose.
The metabolism of ethanol proceeds through oxidation via alcohol
dehydrogenase to the formation of acetaldehyde, which is further metabolized
to acetyl-coenzyme A (acetyl-CoA) by aldehyde dehydrogenase. Disulfiram
is an aldehyde dehydrogenase inhibitor that interferes with the metabolism of
alcohol by producing a marked increase in blood acetaldehyde concentration.
The accumulation of acetaldehyde (to a level up to 10 times higher than
occurs in the normal metabolism of alcohol) produces a wide array of
unpleasant reactions, called the disulfiram–alcohol reaction, characterized by
nausea, throbbing headache, vomiting, hypertension, flushing, sweating,
thirst, dyspnea, tachycardia, chest pain, vertigo, and blurred vision. The
reaction occurs almost immediately after the ingestion of one alcoholic drink
and may last from 30 minutes to 2 hours.
BLOOD CONCENTRATIONS IN RELATION TO ACTION. Plasma concentrations of

disulfiram vary among individuals because of several factors, most notably
age and hepatic function. In general, the severity of disulfiram–alcohol
reaction is proportional to the amount of the ingested disulfiram and alcohol.
Nevertheless, disulfiram plasma levels are rarely obtained in clinical practice.
The positive correlation between plasma concentrations of alcohol and the




<<<PAGE 2186>>>

intensity of the reaction is described as follows: in sensitive individuals, as
little as a 5 to 10 mg/100 mL increase of the plasma alcohol level may
produce mild symptoms; fully developed symptoms occur at alcohol levels of
50 mg/100 mL, and levels as high as 125 to 150 mg/100 mL result in loss of
consciousness and coma.
Therapeutic Indications. The primary indication for disulfiram use is as
an aversive conditioning treatment for alcohol use disorder. Either the fear of
having a disulfiram–alcohol reaction or the memory of having had one is
meant to condition the person not to use alcohol. Usually, describing the
severity and the unpleasantness of the disulfiram–alcohol reaction graphically
enough discourages the person from imbibing alcohol. Disulfiram treatment
should be combined with such treatments as psychotherapy, group therapy,
and support groups such as Alcoholics Anonymous (AA). Treatment with
disulfiram requires careful monitoring because a person can decide not to
take the medication.
Precautions and Adverse Reactions
WITH ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION. The intensity of the disulfiram–alcohol reaction
varies with each person. In extreme cases, it is marked by respiratory
depression, cardiovascular collapse, myocardial infarction, convulsions, and
death. Therefore, disulfiram is contraindicated for persons with significant
pulmonary or cardiovascular disease. Also, disulfiram should be used with
caution, if at all, by persons with nephritis, brain damage, hypothyroidism,
diabetes, hepatic disease, seizures, polydrug dependence, or an abnormal
electroencephalogram. Most fatal reactions occur in persons who take more
than 500 mg a day of disulfiram and who consume more than 3 oz of alcohol.
The treatment of a severe disulfiram–alcohol reaction is primarily supportive
to prevent shock. The use of oxygen, intravenous vitamin C, ephedrine, and
antihistamines have been reported to aid in recovery.
WITHOUT ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION. The adverse effects of disulfiram in the

absence of alcohol consumption include fatigue, dermatitis, impotence, optic
neuritis, a variety of mental changes, and hepatic damage. A metabolite of
disulfiram inhibits dopamine-




<<<PAGE 2187>>>

β-hydroxylase, the enzyme that metabolizes dopamine into norepinephrine
and epinephrine, and thus may exacerbate psychosis in persons with
psychotic disorders. Catatonic reactions may also occur.
Drug Interactions. Disulfiram increases the blood concentration of
diazepam (Valium), paraldehyde, phenytoin (Dilantin), caffeine,
tetrahydrocannabinol (the active ingredient in marijuana), barbiturates,
anticoagulants, isoniazid (Nydrazid), and tricyclic drugs. Disulfiram should
not be administered concomitantly with paraldehyde because paraldehyde is
metabolized to acetaldehyde in the liver.
Laboratory Interferences. In rare instances, disulfiram has been reported
to interfere with the incorporation of iodine-131 into protein-bound iodine.
Disulfiram may reduce urinary concentrations of homovanillic acid, the
major metabolite of dopamine, because it inhibits dopamine hydroxylase.
Dosage and Clinical Guidelines. Disulfiram is supplied in 250- and 500mg tablets. The usual initial dosage is 500 mg a day, taken by mouth for the
first 1 or 2 weeks, followed by a maintenance dosage of 250 mg a day. The
dosage should not exceed 500 mg a day. The maintenance dosage range is
125 to 500 mg a day.
Persons taking disulfiram must be instructed that the ingestion of even the
smallest amount of alcohol will bring on a disulfiram–alcohol reaction, with
all of its unpleasant effects. Also, persons should be warned against ingesting
any alcohol-containing preparations, such as cough drops, tonics of any kind,
and alcohol-containing foods and sauces. Some reactions have occurred in
patients who used alcohol-based lotions, toilet water, colognes, or perfumes
and inhaled the fumes; therefore, precautions must be explicit and should
include any topically applied preparations containing alcohol, such as
perfume.
Disulfiram should not be administered until the person has abstained from
alcohol for at least 12 hours. Persons should be warned that the disulfiram–
alcohol reaction may occur as long as 1 or 2 weeks after the last dose of
disulfiram. Persons taking disulfiram should carry identification cards
describing the disulfiram–alcohol reaction and listing the name and telephone
number of the physician to be called.




<<<PAGE 2188>>>

Acamprosate
Pharmacologic Actions. Acamprosate’s mechanism of action is not fully
understood, but it is thought to antagonize neuronal overactivity related to the
actions of the excitatory neurotransmitter glutamate. In part, this may result
from antagonism of NMDA receptors.
Indications. Acamprosate is used for treating alcohol-dependent individuals
seeking to continue to remain alcohol-free after they have stopped drinking.
Its efficacy in promoting abstinence has not been demonstrated in persons
who have not undergone detoxification and who have not achieved alcohol
abstinence before beginning treatment.
Precautions and Adverse Effects. Side effects are mostly seen early in
treatment and are usually mild and transient. The most common side effects
are headache, diarrhea, flatulence, abdominal pain, paresthesias, and various
skin reactions. No adverse events occur after abrupt withdrawal of
acamprosate, even after long-term use. There is no evidence of addiction to
the drug. Patients with severe renal impairment (creatinine clearance of less
than 30 mL/min) should not be given acamprosate.
Drug Interactions. Alcohol and acamprosate do not affect each other’s
pharmacokinetics. The same is true when adding disulfiram or diazepam to
acamprosate. Coadministration of naltrexone with acamprosate produces an
increase in concentrations of acamprosate. No adjustment of dosage is
recommended in such patients. The pharmacokinetics of naltrexone and its
major metabolite 6-β-naltrexol were unaffected after coadministration with
acamprosate. During clinical trials, patients taking acamprosate
concomitantly with antidepressants more commonly reported both weight
gain and weight loss compared with patients taking either medication alone.
Laboratory Interferences. Acamprosate has not been shown to interfere
with commonly performed laboratory tests.
Dosage and Clinical Guidelines. It is important to remember that
acamprosate should not be used to treat alcohol withdrawal symptoms. It
should only be started after the individual has been successfully weaned off




<<<PAGE 2284>>>

Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:3004.
Hser YI, Hoffman V, Grella CE, Anglin MD. A 33-year follow-up of
narcotics addicts. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2001;58:503–508.
Ivanov I. Disulfiram and acamprosate. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P,
eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed.
Vol. 2. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:3099.
Johnson BA. Update on neuropharmacological treatments for alcoholism:
scientific basis and clinical findings. Biochem Pharmacol. 2008;75(1):34.
Johnson BA, Ait-Daoud N, Prihoda TJ. Combining ondansetron and
naltrexone effectively treats biologically predisposed alcoholics: from
hypotheses to preliminary clinical evidence. Alcoholism Clin Exp Res.
2000;24(5):737–742.
Karachalios GN, Charalabopoulos A, Papalimneou V, Kiortsis D, Dimicco P.
Withdrawal syndrome following cessation of antihypertensive drug
therapy. Int J Clin Pract. 2005;5:562.
King A, De Wit H, Riley RC, Cao D, Niaura R. Efficacy of naltrexone in
smoking cessation: a preliminary study and an examination of sex
differences. Nicotine Tobacco Res. 2006;8(5):671–682.
Kleber HD. Methadone maintenance 4 decades later: thousands of lives saved
but still controversial. JAMA. 2008;300:2303.
Kornfield R, Watson S, Higashi AS, Conti RM, Dusetzina SB, Garfield CF,
Dorsey ER, Huskamp HA, Alexander GC. Effects of FDA advisories on
the pharmacologic treatment of ADHD, 2004–2008. Psychiatr Serv.
2013;64(4):339–346.
Krishnan-Sarin S, Rounsaville BJ, O’Malley SS. Opioid receptor antagonists:
naltrexone and nalmefene. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan
& Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Vol. 2.
Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:3171.
Krystal JH, Cramer JA, Kroll WF, Kirk GF, Rosenheck RA. Naltrexone in
the treatment of alcohol dependence. N Engl J Med. 2001;345(24):1734.
Laaksonen E, Koski-Jännes A, Salaspuro M, Ahtínen H, Alho H. A
randomized, multicentre, open-label, comparative trial of disulfiram,
naltrexone and acamprosate in the treatment of alcohol dependence.
Alcohol. 2008;43(1):53–61.
Likar R, Kayser H, Sittl R. Long-term management of chronic pain with
transdermal buprenorphine: a multicenter, open-label, follow-up study in




<<<PAGE 3599>>>

Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors, 19, 601
Anhedonia, 379
Anima, 1083
Animal models, genetic variation studies, 992–993
Animistic thinking, 1008
Anna O, Fräulein, 1057–1058
Anniversary reactions, 850
Anorexia nervosa, 20, 628
clinical features, 469
comorbidity, 475
course and prognosis, 476
diagnosis and clinical features, 470–471, 470t
differential diagnosis, 474
epidemiology, 478
etiology, 479
developmental factors, 479
environmental and social factors, 479
genetic and biologic factors, 479
psychological factors, 479
pathology and laboratory examination, 473
subtypes of, 469
treatment, 476–477
hospitalization, 476–477
pharmacotherapy, 477
psychotherapy, 477
Anosognosia, 48, 88, 933
Anoxic amnesia, 439
Antabuse. See Disulfiram
Anterior capsulotomy, 741
Anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), 398
Anterior cingulotomy, 741
Anterograde amnesia, 1024
Anticholinergic adverse effects, 20, 23
Anticholinergic drugs, 597
dosage and clinical guidelines, 702–703
drug interactions, 702
pharmacologic actions, 701–702




<<<PAGE 3642>>>

dissociative identity disorder, 440–444, 442t. See also Dissociative
identity disorder
dissociative trance, 444, 448
Distortions, 114. See also Speech sound disorder
Disulfiram, 693–694
in alcohol use disorder treatment, 283, 284t
for cocaine use disorder, 307
Ditropan. See Oxybutynin
Diupres. See Reserpine
Divorce, 587, 589, 912
community, 912
coparental, 912
economic, 912
effects on children, 897, 897t
legal, 912
psychic, 912
reasons for, 912–913
Dlx genes, 940, 944
DOB (2,5-dimethoxy-4-bromoamphetamine), 303
Docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), 977
Doctrine of parens patriae, 839
Domestic violence, 584
Dominic-R, 77, 78
Donepezil, 697
Do-not-intubate (DNI) order, 858
Do-not-resuscitate (DNR) order, 858
L-Dopa, 705–706
Dopamine
function of, 955
metabolites of, 958
mood disorders and, 350
secretion, 955
sexual behavior and, 567–568
transporters, 959
Dopamine agonists, 704–705
dosage and clinical guidelines, 706, 706t
drug interactions, 706


