<<<PAGE 819>>>

abnormalities in memory and speech, we should suspect a temporal lobe
tumor.
COGNITION. Impaired intellectual functioning often accompanies the presence

of a brain tumor, regardless of its type or location.
LANGUAGE SKILLS. Disorders of language function may be severe, mainly if

tumor growth is rapid. Defects of language function often obscure all other
mental symptoms.
Table 3-34
Commonly Used Anticonvulsant Drugs
Drug

Use

Carbamazepine Generalized tonic–clonic, partial

Maintenance
Dosage
(mg/day)
600–1,200

Clonazepam

Absence, atypical myoclonic

2–12

Ethosuximide

Absence

1,000–2,000

Gabapentin

Complex partial seizures
(augmentation)

900–3,600

Lamotrigine

Complex partial seizures,
generalized (augmentation)

300–500

Oxcarbazepine Partial

600–2,400

Phenobarbital

Generalized tonic–clonic

100–200

Phenytoin

Generalized tonic–clonic, partial,
status epilepticus

300–500

Primidone

Partial

750–1,000

Tiagabine

Generalized

32–56

Topiramate

Complex partial seizures
(augmentation)

200–400




<<<PAGE 988>>>

of the patient’s family and peers, is used as a therapeutic network joining the
patient and therapist at intervals in therapy sessions. The approach promotes
group cohesiveness as a vehicle for engaging patients in this treatment. This
network is managed by the therapist to provide cohesiveness and support and
to promote compliance with treatment. Although network therapy has not
received systematic, controlled evaluation, it is frequently applied in the
psychiatric practice because it is one of the few manualized approaches
designed for use by individual practitioners in an office setting.
Pharmacologic Adjuncts
Presently, no pharmacologic treatments produce decreases in stimulant use.
However, investigators have explored several agents, and those are
summarized below.
Amphetamines. Multiple medications have been investigated as potential
treatment options for amphetamine-type stimulant disorders, though the
results have been mostly disappointing. Most serotonergic medications
studied have not demonstrated efficacy, though mirtazapine has shown some
effectiveness in a small sample of men who have sex with men. The opioidreceptor antagonist naltrexone and the dopamine antidepressant bupropion
have both shown promise in those with less severe amphetamine use
disorders, but little effect on more dependent individuals. Other medications,
including topiramate, aripiprazole, baclofen, gabapentin, and modafinil, have
demonstrated little effectiveness in this population.
Cocaine. A variety of pharmacologic agents, most approved for other uses,
have been, and are being tested clinically for the treatment of cocaine use
disorder and relapse.
Cocaine users presumed to have preexisting ADHD or mood disorders
have been treated with methylphenidate and lithium, respectively. Those
drugs are of little or no benefit in patients without the disorders, and
clinicians should adhere strictly to diagnostic criteria before using either of
them in the treatment of cocaine use disorder. In patients with ADHD, slowrelease forms of methylphenidate may be less likely to trigger cocaine
craving, but the impact of such pharmacotherapy on cocaine use is not clear.
Investigators have explored many pharmacologic agents on the premise




<<<PAGE 1199>>>

Combination therapy: lithium or divalproex +
haloperidol, lithium + carbamazepine,
adjunctive tamoxifen
Not
Monotherapy: gabapentin, topiramate, lamotrigine,
recommended
verapamil, tiagabine
Combination therapy: risperidone +
carbamazepine, olanzapine + carbamazepine
ECT, electroconvulsive therapy; XR or ER, extended release.
Modified from CANMAT/ISBD Guidelines.

Table 6-6 lists some recommended medications for treating acute mania.
Adherence to treatment, however, is often a problem because patients with
mania frequently lack insight into their illness and refuse to take medication.
Because impaired judgment, impulsivity, and aggressiveness combine to put
the patient or others at risk, we must medicate patients when we need to
protect themselves and others from harm.
INITIAL MEDICATION SELECTION. Figure 6-2 diagrams a strategy for selecting

and preparing a bipolar patient for pharmacotherapy.
Acute Mania. The treatment of acute mania, or hypomania, usually is the
most straightforward phase to treat. We can use agents alone or in
combination to bring the patient down from a high.
Lithium Carbonate. Lithium carbonate is considered the prototypical mood
stabilizer. However, because the onset of antimanic action with lithium can
be slow, we often supplement it in the early phases of treatment by atypical
antipsychotics, mood-stabilizing anticonvulsants, or high-potency
benzodiazepines. Therapeutic lithium levels are between 0.6 and 1.2 mEq/L.
The acute use of lithium has been limited in recent years by its unpredictable
efficacy, problematic side effects, and the need for frequent laboratory tests.
The introduction of newer drugs with more favorable side effects, lower
toxicity, and less need for frequent laboratory testing has resulted in a decline
in lithium use. For many patients, however, its clinical benefits can be
remarkable.




<<<PAGE 1201>>>

skin rash. Evidence for valproate and other anticonvulsants is limited.
Gabapentin and levetiracetam appear to be ineffective.
Antipsychotics. Several of the atypical antipsychotics have shown efficacy
for bipolar depression. Quetiapine has the best evidence. It appears that
quetiapine, in a modest dose (300 mg/day), is sufficient to improve
symptoms. Olanzapine, lurasidone, and cariprazine also have positive studies,
and the FDA approved lurasidone for this indication. Ziprasidone and
aripiprazole do not appear to be effective.
Antidepressants. It remains controversial whether antidepressants are useful
for the depressive phase of bipolar disorder. This is particularly true in
patients with rapid cycling and mixed states. They seem to be less effective
than for major depressive disorder and may induce cycling, mania, or
hypomania. The risk of inducing mania seems highest for tricyclic
antidepressants, monoamine oxidase inhibitors, and perhaps the serotonin
norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors such as venlafaxine. Most experts agree
that antidepressants are not appropriate as monotherapy for patients with
bipolar disorder.
Whether we can use them as adjuncts is also controversial. Some
antidepressants have some evidence of efficacy for adjunctive therapy, such
as fluoxetine. On the whole, the available evidence suggests they may have
some usefulness when combined with a mood stabilizer.




<<<PAGE 1318>>>

subtypes under
development
Note: Gabapentin
and pregabalin
although
structurally
related to GAB
do not act on
GABA receptor
Glutamate

Amygdala,
hippocampus,
frontal and
cingulate
cortices

Possible imbalance Efficacy of DCS as
between tonic
adjunct to
GABAergic
exposure
inhibition and
therapy for
glutamateacrophobia, SA
mediated
and PD
excitation in PD Glycine transporte
inhibitors under
study
Metabotropic
receptor
modulators
under study
NMDA receptor
antagonism as
potential
anxiolytic—
preliminary
efficacy of
riluzole for GAD

Neuropeptide Y
(NPY)

Amygdala,
hippocampus,
brainstem,
nucleus
accumbens,

Low NPY levels in Intranasal
PTSD, less well
administration
studied in
may reduce
anxiety disorders
anxiety, under
investigation




<<<PAGE 1486>>>

pharmacologic agents such as dual (norepinephrine and serotonin) reuptake
inhibitors and limited data on gabapentin, there is no evidence that a purely
pharmacologic approach targeting the treatment of somatic symptom disorder
will be sufficient.
Illness Anxiety Disorder
Various group and individual therapies, including CBT and psychodynamic
therapy, have been proposed over the years to manage patients with health
anxiety. Several controlled trials have demonstrated efficacy for CBT
interventions, making CBT the prototype, first-line treatment for illness
anxiety disorder. Other types of therapy, including mindfulness training,
exposure therapy, and acceptance and commitment therapy, have also
demonstrated some efficacy.
Limited data exist to guide pharmacologic treatment of illness anxiety
disorder. There have been a few randomized, placebo-controlled trials that
demonstrated benefit with SSRIs. Most reports have been anecdotal, singleblind studies. A recent randomized controlled trial of 195 patients with
hypochondriasis demonstrated the efficacy and safety of fluoxetine in this
patient population. Interestingly, the addition of CBT to fluoxetine conferred
a slight added benefit.
Conversion Disorder (Functional Neurologic Symptom Disorder)
Many conversion syndromes have an acute, benign course and may remit
spontaneously with understanding and support. Early intervention can
forestall potential chronicity and the progression into a well-entrenched
somatization disorder. Once chronicity has developed, intensive treatment
may use all treatment modalities, including hospitalization, individual or
group therapy, insight-oriented therapies, behavioral techniques, hypnosis,
sodium amytal interview, physical therapy, biofeedback, relaxation training,
and medication (primarily for comorbid anxiety, depression, or other
somatoform disorders). Psychological interpretations or explanations do not
work well early in the process, but reassuring patients that critical tests are
normal and that symptoms will eventually improve may be helpful. Any
implication to the patient that he or she is malingering is very
counterproductive. Behavioral interventions should focus on improving self-




<<<PAGE 1638>>>

assuring sufficient sleep are first-line therapies. Sometimes, if the individual
voluntarily makes very–rapid eye movements or is touched by another
person, the episode will usually terminate.
Sleep Enuresis. Treating sleep enuresis involves medication, behavioral
interventions, or both. Among medications, desmopressin acetate is the
preferred choice. Other medications used to treat sleep enuresis include
imipramine and oxybutynin chloride. Behavioral treatments, including
bladder training, using conditioning devices (bell and pad), diet modification,
and fluid restriction, have reported success when properly administered.
Other treatments include psychotherapy, motivational strategies, and
hypnotherapy.
Restless Legs Syndrome. Pharmacologically, the dopaminergic agonists
pramipexole, rotigotine, and ropinirole are FDA approved and represent the
treatment of choice. Other agents used to treat RLS include dopamine
precursors (e.g., levodopa), benzodiazepines, opiates (including prolongedrelease oxycodone–naloxone), and antiepileptic drugs (e.g., gabapentin,
pregabalin). When iron deficiency is present, or when ferritin levels are low,
iron supplementation can also be helpful. Nonpharmacologic treatment
includes avoiding alcohol or nicotine use close to bedtime, massaging the
affected parts of the legs, taking hot baths, applying hot or cold to the
affected areas, magnetic or electric stimulation therapy, and moderate
exercise.
Periodic Limb Movement Disorder Treatment. Pharmacotherapy for
PLMD associated with RLS is the same as for RLS. Clinical trials of
pharmacotherapy for other forms of PLMD are lacking. However,
benzodiazepines, especially clonazepam, reportedly improve sleep in patients
with PLMD.
Sleep-Related Bruxism. The usual treatment involves having the patient
wear an oral appliance to protect the teeth during sleep. There are two basic
types of appliances: the soft one (mouth guard) is typically used in the short
term, whereas the hard acrylic one (bite splint) is used long term and requires
regular follow-up. Relaxation, biofeedback, hypnosis, physical therapy, and




<<<PAGE 1902>>>

Cognitive Impairment. Cognitive impairment means a disturbance in the
capacity to think. Some agents, such as the benzodiazepine agonists, are
recognized as causes of cognitive impairment. Other widely used
psychotropics, such as the SSRIs, lamotrigine (Lamictal), topiramate
(Topamax), gabapentin (Neurontin), lithium, TCAs, and bupropion, however,
are also associated with varying degrees of memory impairment and wordfinding difficulties. In contrast to the benzodiazepine-induced anterograde
amnesia, these agents cause a more subtle type of absent-mindedness. Drugs
with anticholinergic properties are likely to worsen memory performance.
Sweating. Severe perspiration unrelated to ambient temperature is
associated with TCAs, SSRIs, and venlafaxine. This side effect is often
socially disabling. Attempts can be made to treat this side effect with alpha
agents, such as terazosin (Hytrin) and oxybutynin (Ditropan).
Cardiovascular Disturbances. Newer agents are less likely to have
direct cardiac effects. Many older agents, such as TCAs and phenothiazines,
affected BP and cardiac conduction. Thioridazine (Mellaril), which has been
in use for decades, has been shown to prolong the QTc interval in a doserelated manner and may increase the risk of sudden death by delaying
ventricular repolarization and causing torsades de pointes. Newer drugs are
now routinely scrutinized for evidence of cardiac effects. A promising
treatment for psychosis, sertindole (Serlect), was not marketed because the
FDA would have required a black box warning. Slight QTc effects noted with
ziprasidone (Geodon) delayed the marketing of that drug. Clozapine can
cause myocarditis in rare cases.
Rash. Any medication is a potential source of a drug rash. Some
psychotropics, such as carbamazepine (Equetro, Tegretol) and lamotrigine,
have been linked to an increased risk of severe exfoliative dermatitis.
Commonly referred to as Stevens–Johnson syndrome, this condition is a
systemic, immune-mediated reaction that can prove fatal or result in
permanent scarring or blindness. All patients should be informed about the
potential seriousness of widespread lesions that occur above the neck, that
involve the mucous membranes, and that may be associated with fever and




<<<PAGE 2075>>>

should be given folic acid supplements. Infants breastfed by mothers taking
valproate develop serum valproate concentrations 1 to 10 percent of maternal
serum concentrations, but no data suggest that this poses a risk to the infant.
Valproate is not contraindicated in nursing mothers. We should avoid this
drug in patients with hepatic diseases. Valproate may be especially
problematic for adolescents and young women. Cases of polycystic ovarian
disease have been reported in women using valproate. Even when the full
syndromal criteria for this syndrome are not met, many of these women
develop menstrual irregularities, hair loss, and hirsutism. These effects are
thought to result from a metabolic syndrome that is driven by insulin
resistance and hyperinsulinemia.
The common adverse effects associated with valproate (Table 21-33) are
those affecting the GI system, such as nausea, vomiting, dyspepsia, and
diarrhea. The GI effects are generally most common in the first month of
treatment, significantly if the dosage is increased rapidly. Unbuffered
valproic acid (Depakene) is more likely to cause GI symptoms than the
enteric-coated “sprinkle” or the delayed-release divalproex sodium
formulations. Other common adverse effects involve the nervous system,
such as sedation, ataxia, dysarthria, and tremor. Valproate-induced tremor
may respond well to treatment with β-adrenergic receptor antagonists or
gabapentin. Treatment of the other neurologic adverse effects usually requires
lowering the valproate dosage.
Weight gain is a common adverse effect, especially in long-term treatment,
and can best be treated by strict limitation of caloric intake. Hair loss may
occur in 5 to 10 percent of all persons treated, and rare cases of complete loss
of body hair have been reported. Some clinicians have recommended
treatment of valproate-associated hair loss with vitamin supplements that
contain zinc and selenium. About 5 to 40 percent of persons experience a
persistent but clinically insignificant elevation in liver transaminases up to
three times the upper limit of normal, which is usually asymptomatic and
resolves after discontinuation of the drug. High dosages of valproate (above
1,000 mg a day) may rarely produce mild to moderate hyponatremia, most
likely because of some degree of the syndrome of secretion of inappropriate
antidiuretic hormone, which is reversible upon lowering of the dosage.
Overdoses of valproate can lead to coma and death.




<<<PAGE 2097>>>

OTHER ANTICONVULSANTS
The anticonvulsants described in this section were developed for the
treatment of epilepsy but were also found to have beneficial effects in
psychiatric disorders. Also, these agents are used as skeletal muscle relaxants
and in neurogenic pain. These drugs have a variety of mechanisms, including
increasing GABAergic function or decreasing glutamatergic function. This
section includes seven anticonvulsants: gabapentin (Neurontin), levetiracetam
(Keppra), pregabalin (Lyrica), tiagabine (Gabitril), topiramate (Topamax),
and zonisamide (Zonegran), as well as one of the first used anticonvulsants,
phenytoin (Dilantin). Carbamazepine (Tegretol), valproate (Depakene,
Depakote), lamotrigine (Lamictal), and oxcarbazepine (Trileptal) are
discussed in separate sections.
In 2008, the FDA issued a warning that these drugs may increase the risk
of suicidal ideation or act in some persons compared with placebo; however,
the relative risk for suicidality was higher in patients with epilepsy compared
with those with psychiatric disorders. However, some published data
contradict this warning. These studies suggest that anticonvulsants may have
a protective effect on suicidal thoughts in bipolar disorder. Considering the
inherently increased risk of suicide in persons with bipolar disorder,
clinicians should be aware of these warnings.
Gabapentin
Gabapentin was first introduced as an antiepileptic drug and was found to
have sedative effects that were useful in some psychiatric disorders,
especially insomnia. It was also found to be beneficial in reducing
neuropathic pain, including postherpetic neuralgia. It is used in anxiety
disorders (social phobia and panic disorder), but not as the primary
intervention in mania or treatment-resistant mood disorders.
Pharmacologic Actions. Gabapentin circulates in the blood primarily
unbound and is not appreciably metabolized in humans. It is eliminated
unchanged by renal excretion and can be removed by hemodialysis. Food
only moderately affects the rate and extent of absorption. Clearance is
decreased in elderly persons, requiring dosage adjustments. Gabapentin




<<<PAGE 2098>>>

appears to increase cerebral GABA and may inhibit glutamate synthesis as
well. It increases human whole blood serotonin concentrations and modulates
calcium channels to reduce monoamine release. It has antiseizure as well as
antispastic activity and antinociceptive effects in pain.
Therapeutic Indications. In neurology, gabapentin is used for the
treatment of both general and partial seizures. It is useful in reducing the pain
of postherpetic neuralgia and other pain syndromes associated with diabetic
neuropathy, neuropathic cancer pain, fibromyalgia, meralgia paresthetica,
amputation, and headache. It is useful in some cases of chronic pruritus.
In psychiatry, gabapentin is used as a hypnotic agent because of its
sedating effects. It has anxiolytic properties and benefits patients with social
anxiety and panic disorder. It may decrease the craving for alcohol in some
patients and improve mood as well; hence, it may have some use in depressed
patients. Some bipolar patients have benefited when gabapentin is used
adjunctively with mood stabilizers.
Precautions and Adverse Reactions. Adverse effects are mild, with the
most common being daytime somnolence, ataxia, and fatigue, which are
usually dose-related. Overdose (over 45 g) has been associated with diplopia,
slurred screech, lethargy, and diarrhea, but all patients recovered. The drug
was classified as pregnancy category C in the former FDA classification
system and is excreted in breast milk, so it is best to avoid it in pregnant
women and nursing mothers.
Drug Interactions. Gabapentin bioavailability may decrease as much as 20
percent when administered with antacids. In general, there are no drug
interactions. Chronic use does not interfere with lithium administration.
Laboratory Interferences. Gabapentin does not interfere with any
laboratory tests, although spontaneous reports of false-positive drug
toxicology screenings for amphetamines, barbiturates, benzodiazepines, and
marijuana have been reported.
Dosages and Clinical Guidelines. Gabapentin is well tolerated, and the
dosage can be increased to the maintenance range within a few days. A




<<<PAGE 2099>>>

general approach is to start with 300 mg on day 1, increase to 600 mg on day
2, 900 mg on day 3, and subsequently increase up to 1,800 mg/day in divided
doses as needed to relieve symptoms. Final total daily doses tend to be
between 1,200 and 2,400 mg/day, but occasionally results may be achieved
with dosages as low as 200 to 300 mg/day, especially in elderly persons.
Sedation is usually the limiting factor in determining the dosage. Some
patients have taken dosages as high as 4,800 mg/day.
Gabapentin is available as 100-, 300-, and 400-mg capsules and as 600and 800-mg tablets. A 250-mg/5-mL oral solution is also available. Although
abrupt discontinuation of gabapentin does not cause withdrawal effects, the
use of all anticonvulsant drugs should be gradually tapered.
Topiramate
Topiramate (Topamax) was developed as an anticonvulsant and was found
useful in a variety of psychiatric and neurologic conditions, including
migraine prevention, treatment of obesity, bulimia, binge eating, and alcohol
dependence.
Pharmacologic Actions. Topiramate has GABAergic effects and
increases cerebral GABA in humans. It has 80 percent oral bioavailability
and is not significantly altered by food. It is 15 percent protein-bound, and
about 70 percent of the drug is eliminated by renal excretion. With renal
insufficiency, topiramate clearance decreases by about 50 percent, so the
dosage needs to be decreased. It has a half-life of around 24 hours.
Therapeutic Indications. Topiramate is used mainly as an antiepileptic
medication and has been found superior to placebo as monotherapy in
patients with seizure disorders. It is also used in the prevention of migraine,
smoking cessation, pain syndromes (e.g., low back pain), PTSD, and
essential tremor. The drug has been associated with weight loss, and that fact
has been used to counteract the weight gain caused by many psychotropic
drugs. It has also been used in general obesity and the treatment of bulimia
and binge-eating disorder. Self-mutilating behavior may be decreased in
borderline personality disorder. It is of little or no benefit in the treatment of
psychotic disorders. In one study, the combination of topiramate with
bupropion (Wellbutrin) showed some efficacy in bipolar depression, but




<<<PAGE 2104>>>

efficiently dosed once daily, preferably at nighttime.
Therapeutic Indications. Its primary use is in the treatment of generalized
seizure disorders and refractory partial seizures. In psychiatry, controlled
studies found it to be of use in obesity and binge-eating disorder.
Uncontrolled trials have found it useful in bipolar disorder, particularly
mania; however, further studies are warranted for this indication.
Precautions and Adverse Reactions. Zonisamide is a sulfonamide and
thus may cause a fatal rash and blood dyscrasias, although these events are
rare. About 4 percent of patients develop kidney stones. The most common
side effects are drowsiness, cognitive impairment, insomnia, ataxia,
nystagmus, paresthesia, speech abnormalities, constipation, diarrhea, nausea,
and dry mouth. Weight loss is also a common side effect, which has been
exploited as a therapy for patients who have gained weight during treatment
with psychotropics or, as mentioned above, have ongoing difficulty
controlling their eating. Zonisamide should not be used in pregnant women or
breastfeeding mothers.
Drug Interactions. Zonisamide does not inhibit CYP isoenzymes and does
not instigate drug interactions. It is important not to combine carbonic
anhydrase inhibitors with zonisamide because of an increased risk of
nephrolithiasis related to increased blood levels of urea.
Laboratory Interferences. Zonisamide can elevate hepatic alkaline
phosphatase and increase blood urea nitrogen and creatinine.
Dosages and Clinical Guidelines. Zonisamide is available in 100- and
200-mg capsules. In epilepsy, the dosage range is 100 to 400 mg/day, with
side effects becoming more pronounced at doses above 300 mg. Because of
its long half-life, zonisamide can be given once a day.
Pregabalin
Pregabalin is pharmacologically similar to gabapentin. It is believed to work
by inhibiting the release of excess excitatory neurotransmitters. It increases
neuronal GABA levels, its binding affinity is six times greater than that of




<<<PAGE 2105>>>

gabapentin, and it has a longer half-life.
Pharmacologic Actions. Pregabalin exhibits linear pharmacokinetics. It is
rapidly absorbed in proportion to its dose. The time to maximal plasma
concentration is about 1 hour, and to steady state is within 24 to 48 hours.
Pregabalin demonstrates high bioavailability, and it has a mean elimination
half-life of about 6.5 hours. Food does not affect absorption. Pregabalin does
not bind to plasma proteins and is excreted virtually unchanged (<2 percent
metabolism) by the kidneys. It is not subject to hepatic metabolism and does
not induce or inhibit liver enzymes. Dose reduction may be necessary for
patients with creatinine clearance (CLcr) less than 60 mL/min. Daily doses
should be further reduced by approximately 50 percent for each additional 50
percent decrease in CLcr. Pregabalin is highly cleared by hemodialysis so
that additional doses may be needed for patients on chronic hemodialysis
treatment after each hemodialysis treatment.
Therapeutic Indications. Pregabalin is approved for the management of
diabetic peripheral neuropathy and postherpetic neuralgia and adjunctive
treatment of partial-onset seizures. It is of benefit to some patients with GAD.
In studies, no consistent dose–response relationship was found, although 300
mg of pregabalin per day was more effective than 150 or 450 mg. Some
patients with panic disorder or social anxiety disorder may benefit from
pregabalin, but little evidence supports its routine use in treating persons with
these disorders. It was most recently approved for the treatment of
fibromyalgia.
Precautions and Adverse Reactions. The most common adverse events
associated with pregabalin use are dizziness, somnolence, blurred vision,
peripheral edema, amnesia or loss of memory, and tremors. Pregabalin
potentiates the sedating effects of alcohol, antihistamines, benzodiazepines,
and other CNS depressants. It remains to be seen if pregabalin is associated
with benzodiazepine-type withdrawal symptoms. There are scant data about
its use in pregnant women or nursing mothers, and it is best avoided in these
patients.
Drug Interactions. Given the absence of hepatic metabolism, pregabalin




<<<PAGE 2185>>>

as the development of alternative antialcohol medications, have been the
limiting factors for the broader use of disulfiram. Unlike disulfiram,
acamprosate, the other drug discussed in this section, does not produce
aversive side effects. Acamprosate is now prescribed more commonly than
disulfiram in outpatient settings, but disulfiram is prescribed more often in
inpatient settings because it helps facilitate initial abstinence.
Other drugs that are useful in reducing alcohol consumption include
naltrexone (ReVia, Trexan), nalmefene (Revex), topiramate (Topamax), and
gabapentin (Neurontin). These agents are discussed in their respective
sections.
Disulfiram
Pharmacologic Actions. Disulfiram is almost completely absorbed from
the GI tract after oral administration. Its half-life is estimated to be 60 to 120
hours. Therefore, it may take 1 or 2 weeks to eliminate disulfiram from the
body after taking the last dose.
The metabolism of ethanol proceeds through oxidation via alcohol
dehydrogenase to the formation of acetaldehyde, which is further metabolized
to acetyl-coenzyme A (acetyl-CoA) by aldehyde dehydrogenase. Disulfiram
is an aldehyde dehydrogenase inhibitor that interferes with the metabolism of
alcohol by producing a marked increase in blood acetaldehyde concentration.
The accumulation of acetaldehyde (to a level up to 10 times higher than
occurs in the normal metabolism of alcohol) produces a wide array of
unpleasant reactions, called the disulfiram–alcohol reaction, characterized by
nausea, throbbing headache, vomiting, hypertension, flushing, sweating,
thirst, dyspnea, tachycardia, chest pain, vertigo, and blurred vision. The
reaction occurs almost immediately after the ingestion of one alcoholic drink
and may last from 30 minutes to 2 hours.
BLOOD CONCENTRATIONS IN RELATION TO ACTION. Plasma concentrations of

disulfiram vary among individuals because of several factors, most notably
age and hepatic function. In general, the severity of disulfiram–alcohol
reaction is proportional to the amount of the ingested disulfiram and alcohol.
Nevertheless, disulfiram plasma levels are rarely obtained in clinical practice.
The positive correlation between plasma concentrations of alcohol and the




<<<PAGE 2268>>>

Neurophysiol. 2013;124(1):
148–153.
Du J, Suzuki K, Wei Y, Wang Y, Blumenthal R. The anticonvulsants
lamotrigine, riluzole, and valproate differentially regulate AMPA receptor
membrane localization: Relationship to clinical effects in mood disorders.
Neuropsychopharmacology. 2007;32:793–802.
Dubovsky SL. Calcium channel inhibitors. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz
P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed.
Vol. 2. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:3065.
Dubovsky SL, Buzan RD, Thomas M, Kassner C, Cullum CM. Nicardipine
improves the antidepressant action of ECT but does not improve cognition.
J ECT. 2001;17:
3–10.
Einat H, Manji HK. Cellular plasticity cascades: genes-to-behavior pathways
in animal models of bipolar disorder. Biol Psychiatry. 2006;59:1160–1171.
Findling RL, Frazier TW, Youngstrom EA, McNamara NK, Stansbrey RJ.
Doubleblind, placebo-controlled trial of divalproex monotherapy in the treatment
of symptomatic youth at high risk for developing bipolar disorder. J Clin
Psychiatry. 2007;68:781–788.
Freeman R, Durso-Decruz E, Emir B. Efficacy, safety, and tolerability of
pregabalin treatment for painful diabetic peripheral neuropathy: findings
from seven randomized, controlled trials across a range of doses. Diabetes
Care. 2008;31:1448–1454.
Frye MA, Ketter TA, Kimbrell TA, Dunn RT, Speer AM. A placebocontrolled study of lamotrigine and gabapentin monotherapy in refractory
mood disorders. J Clin Psychopharmacol. 2000;20(6):607–614.
Gadde KM, Franciscy DM, Wagner HR 2nd, Krishnan KR. Zonisamide for
weight loss in obese adults: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA.
2003;289(14):1820–1825.
Geddes JR, Burgess S, Hawton K, Jamison K, Goodwin GM. Long-term
lithium therapy for bipolar disorder: systematic review and meta-analysis
of randomized controlled trials. Am J Psychiatry. 2004;161:217–222.
Geddes JR, Calabrese JR, Goodwin GM. Lamotrigine for treatment of bipolar
depression: Independent meta-analysis and meta-regression of individual
patient data from five randomised trials. Br J Psychiatry. 2009;194:4.




<<<PAGE 2270>>>

Jefferson JW, Greist JH. Lithium. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds.
Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Vol. 2.
Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:3132
Johnson BA, Rosenthal N, Capece JA. Improvement of physical health and
quality of life of alcohol-dependent individuals with topiramate treatment:
US multisite randomized controlled trial. Arch Intern Med.
2008;168:1188–1199.
Johnson BA, Rosenthal N, Capece JA, Wiegand F, Mao L. Topiramate for
treating alcohol dependence: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA.
2007;298(14):1641.
Kamalinia G, Brand S, Ghaeli P, Abedi N, Bajoghli H, Sharifi V, Zahiroddin
A, Amini M, Rouini MR, Holsboer-Trachsler E, Mohammadpoor AH.
Serum levels of sodium valproate in patients suffering from bipolar
disorders: comparing acute and maintenance phases of mania.
Pharmacopsychiatry. 2013;46(3):83–87.
Kato T, Ishiwata M, Mori K, Washizuka S, Tajima O. Mechanisms of altered
Ca2+ signaling in transformed lymphoblastoid cells from patients with
bipolar disorder. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol. 2003;6:379–389.
Ketter TA, Brooks JO, Hoblyn JC. Effectiveness of lamotrigine in bipolar
disorder in a clinical setting. J Psychiatr Res. 2008;43:13–23.
Ketter TA, Greist JH, Graham JA, Roberts JN, Thompson TR. The effect of
dermatologic precautions on the incidence of rash with addition of
lamotrigine in the treatment of bipolar I disorder: a randomized trial. J Clin
Psychiatry. 2006;67(3):400–406.
Ketter TA, Wang PW. Anticonvulsants: Gabapentin, levetiracetam,
pregabalin, tiagabine, topiramate, zonisamide. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA,
Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry.
9th ed. Vol. 2. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins;
2009:3021.
Ketter TA, Wang PW. Lamotrigine. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds.
Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Vol. 2.
Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:3127.
Ketter TA, Wang PW, Becker OV, Nowakowska C, Yang YS. The diverse
roles of anticonvulsants in bipolar disorders. Ann Clin Psychiatry.
2003;15:95–108.
Klitgaard H. Epilepsy therapy: anticonvulsants, lessons learned and unmet




<<<PAGE 2710>>>

per day for relief of symptoms.
Knowing doses of different drugs and different routes of administration is
essential to avoid accidental undermedication. For example, when changing a
patient from intramuscular to oral morphine use, the intramuscular dose must
be multiplied by 6 to avoid causing the patient pain and provoking drugseeking behavior. Many adjuvant drugs used for pain are psychotropic with
which psychiatrists are familiar, but in some cases, their analgesic effect is
separate from their primary psychotropic effect. Commonly used adjuvants
include antidepressants, mood stabilizers (e.g., gabapentin) phenothiazines,
butyrophenones, antihistamines, amphetamines, and steroids. They are
particularly crucial in neuropathic and sympathetically maintained pain, for
which they can be the mainstay of treatment.
Table 29-11
Opioid Analgesics for Management of Pain

Other developments in pain management include more intrusive
procedures, such as nerve blocks or the use of continuous epidural infusions.




<<<PAGE 3658>>>

life of, 1057
on narcissism, 1064
on pleasure principle, 1061
on psychoanalysis, 1057–1072
on psychological theories, 1047
on reality principle, 1061
Frisch, Karl von, 1043
Fromm, Erich, 1081
Frontal lobe syndrome, 935
Frontotemporal dementia, 243, 243f
Frostig Movement Skills Test Battery, 151
Fuld Object Memory Evaluation, 53t
Fulton, John, 740
Functional amnesia, 1032
Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), 61, 73
in alcoholism-related neurotoxicity, 73
in autism spectrum disorder, 131
in dementia, 73
for early-onset bipolar disorder, 184
Functional neurologic symptom disorder. See Conversion disorder
Fusiform gyrus, ASD and, 951
GABAA allosteric modulators, 648
Gabapentin, 253t, 600, 664
Gabitril. See Tiagabine
GAD67 enzyme, 962
Gage, Phineas, 50, 935f
Gait observation, 21
Galactosemia, 87t
Galantamine, 697
Galton, Francis, 1032
Gamblers Anonymous (GA), 7, 332
Gambling disorder, 330–332
clinical features, 330
comorbidity, 331–332
course and prognosis, 332




<<<PAGE 3698>>>

signs, 594
symptoms, 594
treatment, 594
Neuroleptic-induced tardive dyskinesia, 594
Neuroleptic malignant syndrome (NMS), 594–595
diagnosis, 594
disease course and prognosis, 595
epidemiology, 595
laboratory workup for, 64
and muscle injury, 64
signs, 594
symptoms, 594
treatment, 595, 596t
Neuroligin (NLGN) genes, 995
Neurologic examination, 22, 68
Neurologic soft signs, 81
Neurons
disturbed migration of, 952
human brain, 951
life cycle of, 936
migration, 940, 948
Neurontin. See Gabapentin
Neuropeptide neurotransmitters, 965t
Neuropeptides, 965–966
biosynthesis of, 966
distribution, 966
functional studies of, 966
regulation, 966
signaling by, 967
Neuropil, 934, 935
Neuroplasticity hypotheses, 398
Neuropsychiatric inventory (NPI), 45
Neuropsychological assessment
approaches to, 52
battery approach, 52
hypothesis testing approach, 52
mental status examinations, 52


