<<<PAGE 205>>>

for therapeutic reasons. Ingestion of 500 mg/kg of aspirin may be fatal. Most
patients will develop symptoms of toxicity when salicylate levels are greater
than 40 mg/dL. Common symptoms of toxicity include acid–base
abnormalities, tachypnea, tinnitus, nausea, and vomiting. In cases of severe
toxicity, symptoms may include hyperthermia, altered mental status,
pulmonary edema, and death.
Antipsychotic Agents
CLOZAPINE. Clozapine (Clozaril) levels are trough levels determined in the

morning before administration of the morning dose of medication. A
therapeutic range for clozapine has not been established; however, a level of
100 mg/mL is widely considered to be the minimum therapeutic threshold. At
least 350 mg/mL of clozapine is considered to be necessary to achieve
therapeutic response in patients with refractory schizophrenia. The likelihood
of seizures and other side effects increase with clozapine levels greater than
1,200 mg/mL or doses greater than 600 mg per day or both. Clozapine is a
common cause of leukopenia in psychiatry. When moderate to severe
leucopenia develops, clozapine treatment must be interrupted, but patients
may be retreated with clozapine in the future.
Mood Stabilizers
Carbamazepine (Tegretol) may produce changes in the
levels of white blood cells, platelets, and, under rare circumstances, red blood
cells. Anemia, aplastic anemia, leucopenia, and thrombocytopenia may all
occur but are rare. Pretreatment evaluations typically include CBC.
Carbamazepine may produce hyponatremia. This hyponatremia is usually
mild and does not produce clinical symptoms. However, carbamazepine may
cause the syndrome of inappropriate secretion of antidiuretic hormone
(SIADH). Carbamazepine may produce a variety of congenital abnormalities,
including spina bifida and anomalies of the fingers. Manifestations of toxicity
may include nausea, vomiting, urinary retention, ataxia, confusion,
drowsiness, agitation, or nystagmus. At very high levels, symptoms may also
include cardiac dysrhythmias, seizures, and respiratory depression.
CARBAMAZEPINE.




<<<PAGE 414>>>

and inattention in preschoolers with autism spectrum disorder found the
stimulant safe and relatively efficacious; half of the preschoolers developed
side effects including increased stereotypies, gastrointestinal upset, sleep
problems, and emotional lability. Among nonstimulants, one double-blind
placebo-controlled study of hyperactivity, impulsivity, and inattention using
atomoxetine in children with autism spectrum disorder found that it was
significantly more effective than placebo. Side effects included sedation,
irritability, constipation, and nausea. Clonidine, an α-agonist, has also been
studied in children with autism spectrum disorder for the treatment of
hyperactivity with mixed results. Guanfacine may also help in some cases.
Repetitive and Stereotypic Behavior. Antidepressants and mood
stabilizers have been studied for the treatment of these core symptoms of
autism spectrum disorder. One study with fluoxetine found the medication
group only slightly better and not significantly better than the placebo group
regarding the target symptoms, and another trial with escitalopram found no
difference between groups. Risperidone, however, was found to be effective
in targeting irritability, and restrictive and repetitive behaviors were
improved. One study using valproate in a 12-week trial with 55 children with
a mean age of 9½ years with autism spectrum disorder found that those who
were considered responders to irritability also spent less time engaging in
repetitive behaviors.
Agents Administered for Behavioral Impairment in Autism
Spectrum Disorder Based On Open Trials. Quetiapine is an
antipsychotic with more potent 5-HT2A than D2 receptor blocking properties.
Although there are only open-label trials with this agent, some experts use
this when risperidone and olanzapine fail or are intolerable. Doses range from
50 to 200 mg/day. Adverse effects include drowsiness, tachycardia, agitation,
and weight gain.
Clozapine has a heterocyclic chemical structure that is related to certain
first-generation antipsychotics, such as loxapine, although clozapine carries a
lower risk of extrapyramidal symptoms. It is not generally used in the
treatment of aggression and self-injurious behavior unless those behaviors
coexist with psychotic symptoms. The most severe adverse effect is
agranulocytosis, which necessitates monitoring white blood cell count weekly




<<<PAGE 665>>>

social skills deficits, attention deficits, and academic difficulties that often
accompany childhood-onset schizophrenia.
Pharmacotherapy
Second-generation antipsychotics, serotonin-dopamine antagonists, are the
current mainstay pharmacologic treatments for children and adolescents with
schizophrenia. Current data include six randomized clinical trials in youth
investigating the efficacy of second-generation antipsychotics for early-onset
schizophrenia, with limited support for one agent over the others. Although
clozapine, a serotonin receptor antagonist with some dopamine (D2)
antagonism, may be more effective in reducing positive and negative
symptoms, it remains a choice of last resort in youth based on its side effects.
To date, however, evidence from multisite randomized clinical trials supports
some efficacy of risperidone, olanzapine, aripiprazole, and clozapine in the
treatment of childhood- and adolescent-onset schizophrenia. Two randomized
clinical trials using risperidone in adolescents with schizophrenia found
risperidone at doses up to 3 mg/day to be superior to placebo. A multisite
randomized 6-week controlled trial of olanzapine in adolescents with
schizophrenia found that it was more efficacious than a placebo. An RCT of
aripiprazole at two fixed doses found that it was superior to placebo in the
treatment of positive symptoms of adolescent schizophrenia; however, more
than 40 percent of subjects in the active medication group did not achieve
remission. Finally, clozapine is more effective than haloperidol in improving
both positive and negative symptoms in treatment-resistant schizophrenia in
youth. More recently, a study compared clozapine to high doses of
olanzapine and found that response rates were about twice as high for
clozapine as olanzapine (66 percent vs. 33 percent) when the investigators
defined response as 30 percent or better reduction in symptoms on the Brief
Psychiatric Rating Scale and improvement on the Clinical Global Impression
Scale. The Treatment of Early-Onset Schizophrenia Spectrum Disorders
Study compared the efficacy of risperidone and olanzapine with those of
molindone, a mid-potency first-generation antipsychotic. In this study,
lacking a placebo group, each of these agents provided a similar therapeutic
effect; however, fewer than half of the patients responded optimally. Despite
the limited randomized controlled studies of second-generation




<<<PAGE 666>>>

antipsychotics for the treatment of schizophrenia in youth, the FDA is
progressively approving the use of these agents for pediatric schizophrenia
and bipolar illness. In 2007, the FDA approved the use of risperidone and
aripiprazole for the treatment of schizophrenia in 13- to 17-year-olds. The
FDA approved the use of olanzapine and quetiapine in 2009 for the treatment
of schizophrenia in 13- to 17-year-olds. Lurasidone and paliperidone were
approved by the FDA in 2017 for the treatment of schizophrenia in
adolescents.
A double-blind, randomized 8-week controlled trial compared the efficacy
and safety of olanzapine to clozapine in childhood-onset schizophrenia.
Children with childhood-onset schizophrenia who were resistant to at least
two previous treatments with antipsychotics were randomized to treatment
for 8 weeks with either olanzapine or clozapine followed by a 2-year openlabel follow-up. Using the Clinical Global Impression of Severity of
Symptoms Scale and Schedule for the Assessment of Negative/Positive
Symptoms, clozapine was associated with a significant reduction in all
outcome measures. In contrast, olanzapine showed improvement on some
measures but not on all. The only statistically significant measure in which
clozapine was superior to olanzapine was in alleviating negative symptoms
compared with baseline. Clozapine was associated with more adverse events,
such as lipid abnormalities and a seizure in one patient.
Several studies have provided evidence that risperidone, a benzisoxazole
derivative, is as effective as the older high-potency first-generation
antipsychotics, such as haloperidol, and causes less frequent severe side
effects in the treatment of schizophrenia in older adolescents and adults.
Published case reports and limited more extensive controlled studies have
supported the efficacy of risperidone in the treatment of psychosis in children
and adolescents. Risperidone can cause weight gain and dystonic reactions
and other extrapyramidal adverse effects in children and adolescents.
Olanzapine is generally well tolerated for extrapyramidal adverse effects
compared with first-generation antipsychotics and risperidone, but it is
associated with moderate sedation and significant weight gain.
Psychosocial Interventions
Psychosocial interventions aimed at family education and patient and family




<<<PAGE 1141>>>

of these medications. As a result, patients treated with these medications—or
with clozapine—may require weeks to reach a therapeutic dose. Although
most patients develop tolerance to sedation and postural hypotension,
sedation may continue to be a problem. In these patients, daytime drowsiness
may interfere with a patient’s attempts to return to community life.
All antipsychotics elevate prolactin levels, which can result in galactorrhea
and irregular menses. Long-term elevations in prolactin and the resultant
suppression in gonadotropin-releasing hormone can cause suppression in
gonadal hormones. These, in turn, may have effects on libido and sexual
functioning. There is also concern that elevated prolactin may cause
decreases in bone density and lead to osteoporosis. The concerns about
hyperprolactinemia, sexual functioning, and bone density are based on
experiences with prolactin elevations related to tumors and other causes. It is
unclear if these risks are also associated with the lower elevations that occur
with prolactin-elevating drugs.
HEALTH MONITORING IN PATIENTS RECEIVING ANTIPSYCHOTICS. Because of the

effects of the second-generation antipsychotics on insulin metabolism,
psychiatrists should monitor several health indicators, including BMI, fasting
blood glucose, and lipid profiles. We should weigh patients and calculate
their BMIs for every visit for at least 6 months after a medication change.
Clozapine. Clozapine is considered the most effective of antipsychotics,
particularly in patients who have been unresponsive to other treatments.
However, it is a challenging drug to administer, given its risk of both severe
side effects (agranulocytosis in approximately 0.3 percent of those taking it,
seizures in as high as 5 percent of those on doses above 600 mg, and, more
rarely, myocarditis) and common ones (hypersalivation, sedation,
tachycardia, weight gain, and postural hypotension). The concerns over
agranulocytosis have resulted in a monitoring system in the United States in
which patients who receive clozapine must be in a program of weekly blood
monitoring for the first 6 months and biweekly monitoring for the next 6
months, and monthly after that.
These limitations have relegated clozapine to a later treatment option, and
most guidelines recommend considering it after a patient has failed at least
two other antipsychotic trials.




<<<PAGE 1681>>>

problem
No obvious nonpharmacologic
precipitant
Dissipates with drug
discontinuation
Antipsychotic drugs and
ejaculatory problems

Perphenazine
Chlorpromazine
Trifluoperazine
Haloperidol
Mesoridazine
Chlorprothixene

Antipsychotic drugs and priapism

Perphenazine
Mesoridazine
Chlorpromazine
Thioridazine
Fluphenazine
Molindone
Risperidone
Clozapine

Table by R. T. Seagraves, M.D.

Because depression is associated with decreased libido, varying levels of
sexual dysfunction and anhedonia are part of the disease process. Some
patients report improved sexual functioning as their depression improves
because of antidepressant medication. The phenomenon makes evaluating
sexual side effects difficult; also, the side effects may disappear with time,
perhaps because a biogenic amine homeostatic mechanism comes into play.




<<<PAGE 1929>>>

risk (1.6 to 1.7 times) of death compared with placebo. All of these agents are
considered first-line drugs for schizophrenia except clozapine, which may
cause adverse hematologic effects that require weekly blood sampling.
Schizophrenia and Schizoaffective Disorder. The SDAs are useful for
treating acute and chronic psychoses such as schizophrenia and
schizoaffective disorder, in both adults and adolescents. SDAs are as good as
or better than typical antipsychotics (DRAs) for the treatment of positive
symptoms in schizophrenia and superior to DRAs for the treatment of
negative symptoms. Compared with persons treated with DRAs, persons
treated with SDAs have fewer relapses and require less frequent
hospitalization, fewer emergency department visits, less phone contact with
mental health professionals, and less treatment in day programs.
Because clozapine has potentially life-threatening adverse effects, it is
appropriate only for patients with schizophrenia who are resistant to all other
antipsychotics. Other indications for clozapine include treatment of persons
with severe tardive dyskinesia—which can be reversed with high dosages in
some cases—and those with a low threshold for EPS. Persons who tolerate
clozapine have done well on long-term therapy. The effectiveness of
clozapine may be increased by augmentation with risperidone, which raises
clozapine concentrations and sometimes results in dramatic clinical
improvement.
Mood Disorders. Most of the SDAs (clozapine being a notable exception)
are FDA approved for the treatment of acute mania. Some of these agents,
including aripiprazole, olanzapine, quetiapine, and quetiapine XR, are also
approved for the maintenance treatment in bipolar disorder as monotherapy
or adjunctive therapy. The SDAs improve depressive symptoms in
schizophrenia, and both clinical experience and clinical trials show that all of
the SDAs augment antidepressants in the acute management of major
depression. At this time, olanzapine, in combination with fluoxetine, has been
approved for treatment-resistant depression, and aripiprazole and quetiapine
XR are indicated for adjunctive therapy to antidepressants in MDDs.
Quetiapine and quetiapine XR are also approved in bipolar depression. A
fixed combination of olanzapine and fluoxetine (Symbyax) is approved as a
treatment for acute bipolar depression.




<<<PAGE 1942>>>

absorbed sublingually. The agent dissolves in saliva within seconds and is
absorbed through the oral mucosa. Sublingual administration avoids first-pass
hepatic metabolism. Patients should be advised to avoid drinking or eating
for 10 minutes after taking asenapine because this may lower the blood
levels. The recommended starting and target dose for schizophrenia is 5 mg
twice a day. In bipolar disorder, the patient may be started on 10 mg twice a
day, and if necessary, the dosage may be lowered to 5 mg twice a day,
depending on the tolerability issues. In acute schizophrenia treatment, there is
no evidence of added benefit with a 10 mg twice-daily dose, but there is an
apparent increase in specific adverse reactions. In both bipolar I disorder and
schizophrenia, the maximum dose should not exceed 10 mg two times a day.
The safety of doses above 10 mg twice a day has not been evaluated in
clinical studies.
Side Effects. The most common side effects observed in schizophrenic and
bipolar disorders are somnolence, dizziness, EPS other than akathisia, and
increased weight. In clinical trials, the mean weight gain after 52 weeks is 0.9
kg, and there were no clinically relevant differences in lipid profile and blood
glucose after 52 weeks. In clinical trials, asenapine was found to increase the
QTc interval in a range of 2 to 5 milliseconds compared to placebo. No
patients treated with asenapine experienced QTc increases 60 milliseconds or
greater from baseline measurements, nor did any experience a QTc of 500
milliseconds or more. Nevertheless, asenapine should be avoided in
combination with other drugs known to prolong QTc interval in patients with
congenital prolongation of QT interval or a history of cardiac arrhythmias,
and in circumstances that may increase the occurrence of torsades de pointes.
Asenapine can elevate prolactin levels, and the elevation can persist during
chronic administration. Galactorrhea, amenorrhea, gynecomastia, and
impotence may occur.
Clozapine (Clozaril)
Indications. In addition to being the most effective drug treatment for
patients who have failed to respond to standard therapies, clozapine has been
shown to benefit patients with severe tardive dyskinesia. Clozapine
suppresses these dyskinesias, but the abnormal movements return when




<<<PAGE 1943>>>

clozapine is discontinued. This suppression is true even though clozapine, on
rare occasions, may cause tardive dyskinesia. Other clinical situations in
which clozapine may be used include the treatment of psychotic patients
intolerant of EPS caused by other agents, treatment-resistant mania, severe
psychotic depression, idiopathic Parkinson disease, Huntington disease, and
suicidal patients with schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorder. Other
treatment-resistant disorders that have demonstrated response to clozapine
include pervasive developmental disorder, autism of childhood, and OCD
(either alone or in combination with an SSRI). Used by itself, clozapine may
very rarely induce obsessive-compulsive symptoms.
Pharmacology. Clozapine is a dibenzothiazepine. It is rapidly absorbed,
with peak plasma levels reached in about 2 hours. Steady state is achieved in
less than 1 week if twice-daily dosing is used. The elimination half-life is
about 12 hours. Clozapine has two significant metabolites, one of which, Ndimethyl clozapine, may have some pharmacologic activities. Clozapine is an
antagonist of 5-HT2A, D1, D3, D4, and α (especially α1) receptors. It has
relatively low potency as a D2 receptor antagonist. Data from PET scanning
show that whereas 10 mg of haloperidol produces 80 percent occupancy of
striatal D2 receptors, clinically significant dosages of clozapine occupy only
40 to 50 percent of striatal D2 receptors. This difference in D2 receptor
occupancy is probably why clozapine does not cause EPS. It has also been
postulated that clozapine and other SDAs bind more loosely to the D2
receptor, and because of this “fast dissociation,” more normal dopamine
neurotransmission is possible.
Dosages. Clozapine is available in 25- and 100-mg tablets. The initial
dosage is usually 25 mg one or two times daily, although a conservative
initial dosage is 12.5 mg twice daily. The dosage can then be increased
gradually (25 mg a day every 2 or 3 days) to 300 mg a day in divided doses,
usually two or three times a day. Dosages up to 900 mg a day can be used.
Testing for blood concentrations of clozapine may be helpful in patients who
fail to respond. Studies have found that plasma concentrations greater than
350 µg/mL are associated with a better likelihood of response.




<<<PAGE 1944>>>

Drug Interactions. Clozapine should not be used with any other drug that
is associated with the development of agranulocytosis or bone marrow
suppression. Such drugs include carbamazepine, phenytoin, propylthiouracil,
sulfonamides, and captopril (Capoten). Lithium combined with clozapine
may increase the risk of seizures, confusion, and movement disorders.
Lithium should not be used in combination with clozapine by persons who
have experienced an episode of neuroleptic malignant syndrome.
Clomipramine (Anafranil) can increase the risk of seizure by lowering the
seizure threshold and by increasing clozapine plasma concentrations.
Risperidone, fluoxetine, paroxetine, and fluvoxamine increase serum
concentrations of clozapine. The addition of paroxetine may precipitate
clozapine-associated neutropenia.
Side Effects. The most common drug-related adverse effects are sedation,
dizziness, syncope, tachycardia, hypotension, electrocardiography (ECG)
changes, nausea, and vomiting. Other common adverse effects include
fatigue, weight gain, various GI symptoms (most commonly constipation),
anticholinergic effects, and subjective muscle weakness. Sialorrhea, or
hypersalivation, is a side effect that begins early in treatment and is most
evident at night. Patients report that their pillows are drenched with saliva.
This side effect is most likely the result of impairment of swallowing.
Although there are reports that clonidine or amitriptyline may help reduce
hypersalivation, the most practical solution is to put a towel over the pillow.
The risk of seizures is about 4 percent in patients taking dosages greater
than 600 mg a day. Leukopenia, granulocytopenia, agranulocytosis, and fever
occur in about 1 percent of patients. During the first year of treatment, there
is a 0.73 percent risk of clozapineinduced agranulocytosis. The risk during the second year is 0.07 percent. For
neutropenia, the risk is 2.32 percent and 0.69 percent, respectively, during the
first and second years of treatment. The only contraindications to the use of
clozapine are a WBC count below 3,500 cells/mm3; a previous bone marrow
disorder; a history of agranulocytosis during clozapine treatment; or the use
of another drug that is known to suppress the bone marrow, such as
carbamazepine (Tegretol).
During the first 6 months of treatment, weekly WBC counts are indicated
to monitor the patient for the development of agranulocytosis. If the WBC




<<<PAGE 1945>>>

count remains normal, the frequency of testing can be decreased to every 2
weeks. Although monitoring is expensive, an early indication of
agranulocytosis can prevent a fatal outcome. Clozapine should be
discontinued if the WBC count is below 3,000 cells/mm3 or the granulocyte
count is below 1,500/mm3. Also, a hematologic consultation should be
obtained, and obtaining a bone marrow sample should be considered. Persons
with agranulocytosis should not be reexposed to the drug. Clozapine cannot
be dispensed without proof of monitoring.
Patients exhibiting symptoms of chest pain, shortness of breath, fever, or
tachypnea should be immediately evaluated for myocarditis or
cardiomyopathy, an infrequent but serious adverse effect ending in death.
Serial CPK-MB (creatine phosphokinase with myocardial band fractions),
troponin levels, and ECG studies are recommended, with immediate
discontinuation of clozapine.
Iloperidone (Fanapt)
Indications. Iloperidone (Fanapt) is indicated for the acute treatment of
schizophrenia in adults. The safety and efficacy of iloperidone in children and
adolescents has not been established.
Pharmacology. Iloperidone is not a derivative of another antipsychotic
agent. It has complex multiple antagonist effects on several neurotransmitter
systems. Iloperidone has a strong affinity for dopamine D3 receptors,
followed by decreasing affinities of α2c-noradrenergic, 5-HT1a, D2a, and 5HT6 receptors. Iloperidone has a low affinity for histaminergic receptors. As
with other antipsychotics, the clinical significance of this receptor binding
affinity is unknown.
Iloperidone has a peak concentration of 2 to 4 hours and a half-life that is
dependent on hepatic isoenzyme metabolism. It is metabolized primarily
through CYP2D6 and CYP3A4, and the dosage should be reduced by half
when administered concomitantly with potent inhibitors of these two
isoenzymes. The half-life is 18 to 26 hours in CYP2D6 extensive
metabolizers and is 31 to 37 hours in CYP2D6 poor metabolizers. Of note,
approximately 7 to 10 percent of whites and 3 to 8 percent of African
Americans cannot metabolize CYP2D6 substrates; hence, dosing should be




<<<PAGE 1948>>>

Clinical Guidelines for SDAs
All SDAs are appropriate for the management of an initial psychotic episode,
but clozapine is reserved for persons who are refractory to all other
antipsychotic drugs. If a person does not respond to the first SDA, other
SDAs should be tried. The choice of drug should be based on the patient’s
clinical status and history of response to medication. Recent studies have
challenged the notion that SDAs require 4 to 6 weeks to reach full
effectiveness, and it may take up to 8 weeks for the full clinical effects of an
SDA to become apparent. The newer meta-analyses suggest that the apparent
benefits may be seen as early as 2 to 3 weeks, and early response or failure is
an indicator of subsequent response or failure.
Nevertheless, it is acceptable practice to augment an SDA with a highpotency DRA or benzodiazepine in the first few weeks of use. Lorazepam
(Ativan) 1 to 2 mg orally or IM can be used as needed for acute agitation.
Once effective, dosages can be lowered as tolerated. Clinical improvement
may take 6 months of treatment with SDAs in some, particularly treatmentrefractory persons.
The use of all SDAs must be initiated at low dosages and gradually tapered
upward to therapeutic dosages. The potential development of adverse effects
necessitates the gradual increase in dosage. If a person stops taking an SDA
for more than 36 hours, drug use should be resumed at the initial titration
schedule. After the decision to terminate olanzapine or clozapine use, dosages
should be tapered whenever possible to avoid cholinergic rebound symptoms
such as diaphoresis, flushing, diarrhea, and hyperactivity.
After assuring themselves of the appropriateness of SDA treatment, the
clinician should explain the risks and benefits of SDA treatment to the person
and the family. In the case of clozapine, an informed consent procedure
should be documented in the person’s chart. The patient’s history should
include information about blood disorders, epilepsy, cardiovascular disease,
hepatic and renal diseases, and drug abuse. The presence of a hepatic or renal
disease necessitates using low starting dosages of the drug. The physical
examination should include supine and standing BP measurements to screen
for orthostatic hypotension. The laboratory examination should include an
ECG and several complete blood counts (CBCs) with WBC counts, which
can then be averaged; and liver and renal function tests. Periodic monitoring




<<<PAGE 1949>>>

of blood glucose, lipids, and body weight is recommended.
Although the transition from a DRA to an SDA may be made abruptly, it is
wiser to taper off the DRA slowly while titrating up the SDA. Clozapine and
olanzapine both have anticholinergic effects, and the transition from one to
the other can usually be accomplished with little risk of cholinergic rebound.
The transition from risperidone to olanzapine is best accomplished by
tapering the risperidone off over 3 weeks while simultaneously beginning
olanzapine at 10 mg a day. Risperidone, quetiapine, and ziprasidone lack
anticholinergic effects, and the abrupt transition from a DRA, olanzapine, or
clozapine to one of these agents may cause cholinergic rebound, which
consists of excessive salivation, nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea. The risk of
cholinergic rebound can be mitigated by initially augmenting risperidone,
quetiapine, or ziprasidone with an anticholinergic drug, which is then tapered
off slowly. Any initiation and termination of SDA use should be
accomplished gradually.
It is wise to overlap the administration of the new drug with the old drug.
Of interest, some people have a more robust clinical response while taking
the two agents during the transition and then regressing on monotherapy with
the newer drug. We know little about the safety of combination antipsychotic
treatment.
Persons receiving regular injections of depot formulations of a DRA who
are to switch to SDA use are given the first dose of the SDA on the day the
next injection is due.
Persons who developed agranulocytosis while taking clozapine can safely
switch to olanzapine use, although initiation of olanzapine use amid
clozapine-induced agranulocytosis can prolong the time of recovery from the
usual 3 to 4 days up to 11 to 12 days. It is prudent to wait for the resolution of
agranulocytosis before initiating olanzapine use. Emergence or recurrence of
agranulocytosis has not been reported with olanzapine, even in persons who
developed it while taking clozapine.
SDA use by pregnant women has not been studied, but consideration
should be given to the potential of risperidone to raise prolactin
concentrations, sometimes up to three to four times the upper limit of the
normal range. Because the drugs can be excreted in breast milk, they should
not be taken by nursing mothers. The dosages for selected SDAs are given in
Table 21-9.




<<<PAGE 1961>>>

paralytic ileus, although the relief is only transitory. Bethanechol
(Urecholine) (20 to 40 mg a day) may be useful in some persons with urinary
retention.
Weight gain is associated with increased mortality and morbidity and with
medication noncompliance. Low-potency DRAs may cause significant
weight gain but not as much as is seen with the SDAs olanzapine (Zyprexa)
and clozapine (Clozaril). Molindone and perhaps loxapine (Loxitane) appear
to be least likely to cause weight gain.
Endocrine Effects. Blockade of the dopamine receptors in the
tuberoinfundibular tract results in the increased secretion of prolactin, which
can result in breast enlargement, galactorrhea, amenorrhea, and inhibited
orgasm in women and impotence in men. The SDAs, except risperidone
(Risperdal), are not significantly associated with an increase in prolactin
levels and may be the drugs of choice for persons experiencing disturbing
side effects from increased prolactin release.
Sexual Adverse Effects. Both men and women taking DRAs can
experience anorgasmia and decreased libido. Up to 50 percent of men who
take antipsychotics report ejaculatory and erectile disturbances. Sildenafil
(Viagra), vardenafil (Levitra), and tadalafil (Cialis) are often used to treat
psychotropic-induced orgasmic dysfunction, but they have not been studied
in combination with the DRAs. Thioridazine is mainly associated with
decreased libido and retrograde ejaculation in men. Priapism and reports of
painful orgasms have also been described, both possibly resulting from α1adrenergic antagonist activity.
Skin and Eye Effects. Allergic dermatitis and photosensitivity may occur,
especially with low-potency agents. Urticarial, maculopapular, petechial, and
edematous eruptions may occur early in treatment, generally in the first few
weeks, and remit spontaneously. A photosensitivity reaction that resembles a
severe sunburn also occurs in some persons taking chlorpromazine. Persons
should be warned of this adverse effect, should spend no more than 30 to 60
minutes in the sun, and should use sunscreens. Long-term chlorpromazine
use is associated with blue-gray discoloration of skin areas exposed to
sunlight. The skin changes often begin with a tan or golden brown color and




<<<PAGE 1965>>>

Fluvoxamine

Fluvoxamine inhibits
metabolism of
haloperidol and
clozapine

Increased
concentrations of
haloperidol and
clozapine

Guanethidine

Antipsychotic antagonizes
guanethidine reuptake

Impaired
antihypertensive
effect

Lithium

Unknown

Rare reports of
neurotoxicity

Meperidine

Additive CNS depression

Hypotension and
sedation

Drug Interactions Assessed to Have Minor or Moderate Severity
Amphetamines,
anorexiants

Decreased pharmacologic
effect of amphetamine

Diminished weight
loss effect;
amphetamines
may exacerbate
psychosis

ACEIs

Additive hypotensive crisis

Hypotension,
postural
intolerance

Antacids
containing
aluminum

Insoluble complex formed
in GI tract

Possible reduced
antipsychotic
effect

AD nonspecific

Decreased metabolism of
AD through competitive
inhibition

Increased AD
concentration

Benzodiazepines Increased pharmacologic
effect of the
benzodiazepine

Respiratory
depression,
stupor,
hypotension




<<<PAGE 1976>>>

metabolism of the coadministered medication. Each of the SSRIs possesses a
potential for slowing or blocking the metabolism of many drugs (Table 2116). Fluvoxamine is the most problematic of the drugs in this respect. It has a
marked effect on several of the CYP enzymes. Examples of clinically
significant interactions include fluvoxamine and theophylline (Slo-Bid, TheoDur) through CYP1A2 interaction, fluvoxamine and clozapine (Clozaril)
through CYP1A2 inhibition; and fluvoxamine with alprazolam (Xanax) or
clonazepam (Klonopin) through CYP3A4 inhibition. Fluoxetine and
paroxetine also possess significant effects on the CYP2D6 isozyme, which
may interfere with the efficacy of opiate analogs, such as codeine and
hydrocodone, by blocking the conversion of these agents to their active form.
Thus, coadministration of fluoxetine and paroxetine with an opiate interferes
with its analgesic effects. Sertraline, citalopram, and escitalopram are least
likely to complicate treatment because of interactions.
The pharmacokinetics of vilazodone (5 to 80 mg) is dose-proportional.
Steady-state plasma levels are achieved in about 3 days. The elimination of
vilazodone is primarily by hepatic metabolism with a terminal half-life of
approximately 25 hours.
Pharmacodynamics. The SSRIs are believed to exert their therapeutic
effects through serotonin reuptake inhibition. They derive their name because
they have little effect on the reuptake of norepinephrine or dopamine. Often,
adequate clinical activity and saturation of the 5-HT transporters are achieved
at starting dosages. As a rule, higher dosages do not increase antidepressant
efficacy but may increase the risk of adverse effects.
Table 21-16
CYP450 Inhibitory Potential of Commonly Prescribed
Antidepressants




<<<PAGE 2077>>>

depressant (e.g., alcohol), and increased severity of extrapyramidal
symptoms, which usually responds to treatment with antiparkinsonian drugs.
Valproate can usually be safely combined with carbamazepine or SDAs.
Perhaps the most worrisome interaction of valproate and a psychotropic drug
involves lamotrigine. Since the approval of lamotrigine for the treatment of
bipolar disorder, it is more likely that patients will be treated with both
agents. Valproate more than doubles lamotrigine concentrations, increasing
the risk of a severe rash (Stevens–Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal
necrolysis).
The plasma concentrations of carbamazepine, diazepam (Valium),
amitriptyline (Elavil), nortriptyline (Pamelor), and phenobarbital (Luminal)
may also be increased when these drugs are coadministered with valproate.
Also, the plasma concentrations of phenytoin (Dilantin) and desipramine
(Norpramin) may be decreased when they are combined with valproate. The
plasma concentrations of valproate may be decreased when the drug is
coadministered with carbamazepine and may be increased when
coadministered with guanfacine (Tenex), amitriptyline, or fluoxetine
(Prozac). Valproate can be displaced from plasma proteins by carbamazepine,
diazepam, and aspirin. Persons who are treated with anticoagulants (e.g.,
aspirin and warfarin [Coumadin]) should also be monitored when valproate
use is initiated to assess the development of any undesired augmentation of
the anticoagulation effects. Interactions of valproate with other drugs are
listed in Table 21-34.
Table 21-34
Interactions of Valproate with Other Drugs
Drug

Interactions Reported with Valproate

Lithium

Increased tremor

Antipsychotics

Increased sedation; increased extrapyramidal
effects; delirium and stupor (single report)

Clozapine

Increased sedation; confusional syndrome (single
report)

Carbamazepine Acute psychosis (single report); ataxia, nausea,




<<<PAGE 2090>>>

consisting of fever, rash, eosinophilia, and possibly fatal myocarditis.
Cleft palate, fingernail hypoplasia, microcephaly, and spina bifida in
infants may be associated with the maternal use of carbamazepine during
pregnancy. Pregnant women should not use carbamazepine unless necessary.
All women with childbearing potential should take 1 to 4 mg of folic acid
daily, even if they are not trying to conceive. Carbamazepine is secreted in
breast milk.
Drug Interactions. Carbamazepine decreases serum concentrations of
numerous drugs as a result of the prominent induction of hepatic CYP3A4
(Table 21-39). Monitoring for a decrease in clinical effects is frequently
indicated. Carbamazepine can decrease the blood concentrations of oral
contraceptives, resulting in breakthrough bleeding and uncertain prophylaxis
against pregnancy. Carbamazepine should not be administered with MAOIs,
which should be discontinued at least 2 weeks before initiating treatment with
carbamazepine. Grapefruit juice inhibits the hepatic metabolism of
carbamazepine. When carbamazepine and valproate are used in combination,
the dosage of carbamazepine should be decreased because valproate displaces
carbamazepine binding on proteins, and the dosage of valproate may need to
be increased.
Table 21-39
Carbamazepine: Drug Interactions
Effect of Carbamazepine on Plasma Agents that May Affect
Concentrations of Concomitant
Carbamazepine Plasma
Agents
Concentrations
Carbamazepine may decrease drug Agents that may increase
plasma concentration of:
carbamazepine plasma
Acetaminophen
concentration:
Alprazolam
Allopurinol
Amitriptyline
Cimetidine
Bupropion
Clarithromycin
Clomipramine
Danazol
Clonazepam
Diltiazem
Clozapine
Erythromycin




<<<PAGE 2236>>>

human pregnancy may expose the fetus to significant risk.
The most common side effects include drowsiness, loss of appetite,
dizziness, headache, nausea, and agitation or irritability. Zonisamide has also
been associated with hypohidrosis. There is a 2 to 4 percent risk of kidney
stones. Other drugs known to provoke stones, such as topiramate or
acetazolamide (Diamox), should not be combined with zonisamide. Severe,
but rare, adverse drug reactions include Stevens–Johnson syndrome, toxic
epidermal necrolysis, and metabolic acidosis.
Typical dosing for weight loss has not been established. Generally,
zonisamide is started at 100 mg at night for 2 weeks, and increased by 100
mg daily every 2 weeks to a target dose of 200 to 600 mg/day in one or two
daily doses.
Metformin (Glucophage). Metformin is a medication for type 2 diabetes
mellitus. Its actions include reduction of hepatic glucose production, reduced
intestinal glucose absorption, increased insulin sensitivity, and improved
peripheral glucose uptake and regulation. It does not increase insulin
secretion.
When used as an adjunct to SGAs, it has consistently been shown to
reduce body weight and waist circumference. Metformin probably has the
best evidence of therapeutic benefit for the treatment of antipsychotic druginduced metabolic syndrome. In several studies, metformin has been shown
to attenuate or reverse some of the weight gain induced by antipsychotics.
The degree of effect on body weight compares favorably with the effect of
other treatment options that are approved for weight reduction. The weight
loss effect of adjunctive metformin appears to be stronger in drug-naive
patients treated with SGA medications. This effect is most evident for those
being treated with clozapine (Clozaril) and olanzapine (Zyprexa). Based on
the existing evidence, if weight gain occurs after SGA initiation, despite
lifestyle intervention, metformin should be considered.
Common side effects include nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, and loss
of appetite. GI side effects can be mitigated by dividing the dose, taking the
drug after meals, or using delayed-release formulations.
One serious treatment risk is that of lactic acidosis. This side effect is more
common in those with reduced renal function than other patients. Although
very rare (approximately 9 in 100,000 persons/yr), it has a 50 percent




<<<PAGE 3137>>>

Benzodiazepines Increased beta activity
Clozapine
(Clozaril)

Nonspecific change

Olanzapine
(Zyprexa)

Nonspecific change

Risperidone
(Risperdal)

Nonspecific change

Quetiapine
(Seroquel)

No significant changes

Aripiprazole
(Abilify)

No significant changes

Lithium

Slowing or paroxysmal activity

Alcohol

Decreased alpha activity; increased theta activity

Opioids

Decreased alpha activity; increased voltage of
theta and delta waves; in overdose, slow waves

Barbiturates

Increased beta activity; in withdrawal states,
generalized paroxysmal activity and spike
discharges

Marijuana

Increased alpha activity in frontal area of brain;
overall slow alpha activity

Cocaine

Similar to marijuana

Inhalants

Diffuse slowing of delta and theta waves

Nicotine

Increased alpha activity; in withdrawal, marked
decrease in alpha activity

Caffeine

In withdrawal, increase in amplitude or voltage of
theta activity

Topographic Quantitative Electroencephalography (QEEG)




<<<PAGE 3523>>>

Clozapine, risperidone,
and olanzapine in the
treatment of
schizophrenia

United States,
Canada,
Europe,
England,
South
America,
South Africa

Kane J, Honigfield G, Singer J, Melt
Clozaril Collaborative Study Gro
treatment-resistant schizophreni
comparison with chlorpromazine
Psychiatry. 1988;45:789; Kane J
Clozapine benefits and risks.
1994;20:23; Ayd FJ Jr. Risperido
unique antipsychotic. Int Drug Th
1994;29:5; Marder SR, Meibach
the treatment of schizophrenia.
1994;151:825; Kane J. Risperido
Psychiatry. 1994;151:802; Beasl
Tran P, Satterlee W, Sanger T. O
placebo and haloperidol acute ph
North American double-blind ola
Neuropsychopharmacology
G, Kuntz A. Review of recent clin
olanzapine. Br J Psychiatry
Czobor P, Sheitman B, Lindenm
Clozapine, olanzapine, risperido
in the treatment of patients with c
schizophrenia and schizoaffectiv


