<<<PAGE 1001>>>

rennet/concurrent MAOI, or other bupropion use. Though bupropion at one
point carried a black box warning regarding neuropsychiatric adverse events
during smoking cessation, the FDA has since removed this warning. This
medication can be started 1 to 2 weeks before a quit date and used for up to 6
months post quit. Of interest, another antidepressant, nortriptyline, appears to
be useful for smoking cessation as well.
Varenicline is a partial agonist at the α4β2 neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine
receptor; it both relieves craving and withdrawal and, unlike other
medications, reduces the reinforcing effects of nicotine by blocking
dopaminergic stimulation responsible for smoking reinforcement/reward.
While there were concerns about the FDA-issued black box warnings for
neuropsychiatric adverse events (depressed mood, agitation, changes in
behavior, suicidal ideation, and suicide), more recent research of varenicline
in psychiatric patients has found that psychiatric symptoms do not worsen nor
does the risk of suicide increase. The FDA has removed the black box
warning associated with neuropsychiatric adverse events from varenicline.
There is also a concern for potential cardiovascular adverse events in patients
taking varenicline (“a small, increased risk of certain cardiovascular adverse
events in people who have a cardiovascular disease”). Clinicians should
counsel patients on these risks and monitor for symptoms related to mental
status and cardiac status.
Combined Psychosocial and Pharmacologic Therapy
Several studies have shown that combining nicotine replacement and
behavior therapy increases quit rates over either therapy alone.

EPIDEMIOLOGY
The 2018 Monitoring the Future Survey reported that nicotine use via
cigarettes is currently at a historic low. Thirty-day smoking rates among
eighth, tenth and twelfth graders were 2.2 percent, 4.2 percent, and 7.6
percent, respectively. However, vaping, which involves the use of a batterypowered device to heat a liquid to or other substances until it aerosolizes
chemicals for inhalation, increased significantly in 2018. Popular
manufacturers of vaping liquids commonly sell them in flavors that are
especially appealing to adolescents. Thirty-day nicotine vaping prevalence




<<<PAGE 1679>>>

possibly by dopaminergic activity and increased production of
norepinephrine.
Venlafaxine and the SSRIs most often have adverse effects because of the
rise in serotonin levels. A lowering of the sex drive and difficulty reaching
orgasm occur in both sexes. Cyproheptadine, an antihistamine with
antiserotonergic effects, and methylphenidate, with adrenergic effects, may
reverse those adverse effects. Trazodone is associated with the rare
occurrence of priapism, the symptom of prolonged erection in the absence of
sexual stimuli. That symptom appears to result from the α1-adrenergic
antagonism of trazodone.
Table 16-12
Some Pharmacologic Agents Implicated in Inhibited Female
Orgasma
Tricyclic antidepressants
Imipramine (Tofranil)
Clomipramine (Anafranil)
Nortriptyline (Aventyl)
Monoamine oxidase inhibitors
Tranylcypromine (Parnate)
Phenelzine (Nardil)
Isocarboxazid (Marplan)
Dopamine receptor antagonists
Thioridazine (Mellaril)
Trifluoperazine (Stelazine)
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
Fluoxetine (Prozac)
Paroxetine (Paxil)
Sertraline (Zoloft)
Fluvoxamine (Luvox)
Citalopram (Celexa)
aThe interrelation between female sexual dysfunction and pharmacologic agents has been

less extensively evaluated than male reactions. Oral contraceptives are reported to decrease




<<<PAGE 2022>>>

led to the development of a new class of antidepressant compounds, the
tricyclics (TCAs). In turn, the finding that imipramine blocked reuptake of
norepinephrine led to research into the role of catecholamines in depression.
After the introduction of imipramine, several other antidepressant compounds
were developed that shared a basic tricyclic structure and had relatively
similar effects. Later, other heterocyclic compounds were also marketed that
were somewhat similar in structure and that had relatively comparable
secondary properties. At one time, amitriptyline (Elavil, Endep) and
imipramine were the two most commonly prescribed antidepressants in the
United States. However, because of their anticholinergic and antihistaminic
side effects, they are rarely used for depression. Nortriptyline (Aventyl,
Pamelor) and desipramine (Norpramin, Pertofrane) became preferred.
Nortriptyline has the least effect on orthostatic hypotension, and desipramine
is the least anticholinergic. Although introduced as antidepressants, the
therapeutic indications for these agents have grown to include panic disorder,
GAD, PTSD, OCD, and pain syndromes. The introduction of newer
antidepressant agents with more selective actions on neurotransmitters or
with unique mechanisms of action has sharply reduced the prescribing of
TCAs and tetracyclics. The improved safety profiles of the newer drugs,
especially when taken in overdose, also contributed to the decline in the use
of older drugs. Nevertheless, the TCAs and tetracyclics remain unsurpassed
in terms of their antidepressant efficacy. Table 21-20 lists TCA and
tetracyclic drugs and their available preparations.
Pharmacologic Actions
The absorption of most TCAs is complete after oral administration, and there
is significant metabolism from the first-pass effect. Peak plasma
concentrations occur within 2 to 8 hours, and the half-lives of the TCAs vary
from 10 to 70 hours; nortriptyline, maprotiline (Ludiomil), and particularly
protriptyline (Vivactil) can have longer half-lives. The long half-lives allow
all the compounds to be given once daily; 5 to 7 days is needed to reach
steady-state plasma concentrations. Imipramine pamoate (Tofranil) is a depot
form of the drug for intramuscular (IM) administration; indications for the
use of this preparation are limited.
The TCAs undergo hepatic metabolism by the CYP450 enzyme system.




<<<PAGE 2023>>>

Clinically relevant drug interactions may result from competition for enzyme
CYP2D6 among TCAs and quinidine, cimetidine (Tagamet), fluoxetine
(Prozac), sertraline (Zoloft), paroxetine (Paxil), phenothiazines,
carbamazepine (Tegretol), and the type IC antiarrhythmics propafenone
(Rythmol) and flecainide (Tambocor). Concomitant administration of TCAs
and these inhibitors may slow down the metabolism and raise the plasma
concentrations of TCAs. Additionally, genetic variations in the activity of
CYP2D6 may account for up to a 40-fold difference in plasma TCA
concentrations in different persons. The dosage of the TCA may need to be
adjusted to correct changes in the rate of hepatic TCA metabolism.
Table 21-20
Tricyclic and Tetracyclic Drug Preparations

The TCAs block the transporter site for norepinephrine and serotonin, thus
increasing synaptic concentrations of these neurotransmitters. Each drug
differs in its affinity for each of these transporters, with clomipramine
(Anafranil) being the most serotonin selective and desipramine the most
norepinephrine selective of the TCAs. Secondary effects of the TCAs include
antagonism at the muscarinic acetylcholine, histamine H1, and α1- and α2adrenergic receptors. The potency of these effects on other receptors largely
determines the side effect profile of each drug. Amoxapine, nortriptyline,
desipramine, and maprotiline have the least anticholinergic activity; doxepin
has the most antihistaminergic activity. Although they are more likely to
cause constipation, sedation, dry mouth, or lightheadedness than the SSRIs,
the TCAs are less prone to cause sexual dysfunction, significant long-term




<<<PAGE 2027>>>

are discontinued. It can result in falls and injuries in affected persons.
Nortriptyline may be the drug least likely to cause this problem. Orthostatic
hypotension is treated with avoidance of caffeine, intake of at least 2 L of
fluid per day, and addition of salt to the diet unless the person is being treated
for hypertension. In persons taking antihypertensive agents, reduction of the
dosage may reduce the risk of orthostatic hypotension. Other possible
autonomic effects are profuse sweating, palpitations, and increased BP.
Although some persons respond to fludrocortisone (Florinef), 0.02 to 0.05 mg
twice a day, the drug has potential toxicities. It is preferable to substitute an
SSRI than to use a mineralocorticoid such as fludrocortisone. The TCAs’ use
should be discontinued several days before elective surgery because of the
occurrence of hypertensive episodes during surgery in persons receiving
TCAs.
Sedation. Sedation is a common effect of the TCAs and may be welcomed
if sleeplessness has been a problem. The sedative effect of the TCAs is a
result of anticholinergic and antihistaminergic activities. Amitriptyline,
trimipramine, and doxepin are the most sedating agents; imipramine,
amoxapine, nortriptyline, and maprotiline are less sedating; and desipramine
and protriptyline are the least sedating agents.
Neurologic Effects. A fine, rapid tremor may occur. Myoclonic twitches
and tremors of the tongue and the upper extremities are common. Rare effects
include speech blockage, paresthesia, peroneal palsies, and ataxia.
Amoxapine is unique in causing parkinsonian symptoms, akathisia, and
even dyskinesia because of the dopaminergic blocking activity of one of its
metabolites. Amoxapine may also cause neuroleptic malignant syndrome in
rare cases. Maprotiline may cause seizures when the dosage is increased too
quickly or is kept at high levels for too long. Clomipramine and amoxapine
may lower the seizure threshold more than other drugs in the class. As a
class, however, the TCAs have a relatively low risk for inducing seizures
except in persons who are at risk for seizures (e.g., persons with epilepsy and
those with brain lesions). Although such persons can still use the TCAs, the
initial dosages should be lower than usual, and subsequent dosage increases
should be gradual.




<<<PAGE 2031>>>

than are young adults. In children, the ECG should be regularly monitored
during the use of a TCA.
The available preparations of TCAs are presented in Table 21-20. The
dosages and therapeutic blood levels for the TCAs vary among the drugs
(Table 21-21). Except for protriptyline, all of the TCAs should be started at
25 mg a day and increased as tolerated. Divided doses at first reduce the
severity of the adverse effects, although most of the dosage should be given
at night to help induce sleep if a sedating drug such as amitriptyline is used.
Eventually, the entire daily dose can be given at bedtime. A common clinical
mistake is to stop increasing the dosage when the person is tolerating the drug
but taking less than the maximum therapeutic dose and does not show clinical
improvement. The clinician should routinely assess the person’s pulse and
orthostatic changes in BP while the dosage is being increased.
Nortriptyline use should be started at 25 mg a day. Most patients need only
75 mg a day to achieve a blood level of 100 mg/nL. However, the dosage
may be raised to 150 mg a day if needed. Amoxapine use should be started at
150 mg a day and raised to 400 mg a day. Protriptyline use should be started
at 15 mg a day and raised to 60 mg a day. Maprotiline has been associated
with an increased incidence of seizures. This risk is most significant if the
dosage is raised too quickly or is maintained at too high a level. Maprotiline
use should be started at 25 mg a day and increased over 4 weeks to 225 mg a
day. It should be kept at that level for only 6 weeks and then be reduced to
175 to 200 mg a day.
Persons with chronic pain may be particularly sensitive to adverse effects
when TCA use is started. Therefore, treatment should begin with low dosages
that are raised in small increments. However, persons with chronic pain may
experience relief on long-term low-dosage therapy, such as amitriptyline or
nortriptyline at 10 to 75 mg a day.
Table 21-21
General Information for the Tricyclic and Tetracyclic
Antidepressants
Generic
Name

Trade Name Usual Adult
Dosage Range
(mg/day)

Therapeutic Plasma
Concentrations
(µg/mL)




<<<PAGE 2032>>>

Imipramine

Tofranil

150–300

150–300a

Desipramine

Norpramin,
150–300
Pertofrane

150–300a

Trimipramine Surmontil

150–300

150–300

Amitriptyline

Elavil, Endep 150–300

100–250b

Nortriptyline

Pamelor,
Aventyl

50–150

50–150a (maximum)

Protriptyline

Vivactil

15–60

75–250

Amoxapine

Asendin

150–400

200–500c

Doxepin

Adapin,
Sinequan

150–300

100–250a

Maprotiline

Ludiomil

150–230

150–300a

Clomipramine Anafranil

130–250

50 to 250c

aExact range may vary among laboratories.
bIncludes parent compound and desmethyl metabolite.
cEstimated from limited studies.

The TCAs should be avoided in children except as a last resort. Dosing
guidelines in children for imipramine include initiation at 1.5 mg/kg a day.
The dosage can be titrated to no more than 5 mg/kg a day. In enuresis, the
dosage is usually 50 to 100 mg a day, taken at bedtime. Clomipramine use
can be initiated at 50 mg a day and increased to no more than 3 mg/kg per
day or 200 mg a day.
When TCA treatment is discontinued, the dosage should first be decreased
to three-fourths the maximal dosage for a month. At that time, if no
symptoms are present, drug use can be tapered by 25 mg (5 mg for
protriptyline) every 4 to 7 days. Slow tapering avoids a cholinergic rebound
syndrome consisting of nausea, upset stomach, sweating, headache, neck
pain, and vomiting. This syndrome can be treated by reinstituting a small
dosage of the drug and tapering more slowly than before. Several case reports
note the appearance of rebound mania or hypomania after the abrupt




<<<PAGE 2033>>>

discontinuation of TCA use.
Plasma Concentrations and Therapeutic Drug Monitoring.
Clinical determinations of plasma concentrations should be conducted after 5
to 7 days on the same dosage of medication and 8 to 12 hours after the last
dose. Because of variations in absorption and metabolism, there may be a 30to 50-fold difference in the plasma concentrations in persons given the same
dosage of a TCA. Nortriptyline is unique in its association with a therapeutic
window—that is, plasma concentrations below 50 ng/mL or above 150
ng/mL may reduce its efficacy.
Plasma concentrations may be useful in confirming compliance, assessing
reasons for drug failures, and documenting effective plasma concentrations
for future treatment. Clinicians should always treat the person and not the
plasma concentration. Some persons have adequate clinical responses with
seemingly subtherapeutic plasma concentrations, and other persons only
respond at supratherapeutic plasma concentrations without experiencing
adverse effects. The latter situation, however, should alert the clinician to
monitor the person’s condition with, for example, serial ECG recordings.
Overdose Attempts. Overdose attempts with TCAs are severe and can
often be fatal. Prescriptions for these drugs should be nonrefillable and for no
longer than 1 week at a time for patients at risk for suicide. Amoxapine may
be more likely than the other TCAs to result in death when taken in overdose.
The newer antidepressants are safer in overdose.
Symptoms of overdose include agitation, delirium, convulsions,
hyperactive deep tendon reflexes, bowel and bladder paralysis, dysregulation
of BP and temperature, and mydriasis. The patient then progresses to coma
and perhaps respiratory depression. Cardiac arrhythmias may not respond to
treatment. Because of the long half-lives of TCAs, the patients are at risk of
cardiac arrhythmias for 3 to 4 days after the overdose, so they should be
monitored in intensive care medical settings.

MONOAMINE OXIDASE INHIBITORS
Introduced in the late 1950s, MAOIs were the first class of approved
antidepressant drugs. The first of these drugs, isoniazid, was intended to be




<<<PAGE 2077>>>

depressant (e.g., alcohol), and increased severity of extrapyramidal
symptoms, which usually responds to treatment with antiparkinsonian drugs.
Valproate can usually be safely combined with carbamazepine or SDAs.
Perhaps the most worrisome interaction of valproate and a psychotropic drug
involves lamotrigine. Since the approval of lamotrigine for the treatment of
bipolar disorder, it is more likely that patients will be treated with both
agents. Valproate more than doubles lamotrigine concentrations, increasing
the risk of a severe rash (Stevens–Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal
necrolysis).
The plasma concentrations of carbamazepine, diazepam (Valium),
amitriptyline (Elavil), nortriptyline (Pamelor), and phenobarbital (Luminal)
may also be increased when these drugs are coadministered with valproate.
Also, the plasma concentrations of phenytoin (Dilantin) and desipramine
(Norpramin) may be decreased when they are combined with valproate. The
plasma concentrations of valproate may be decreased when the drug is
coadministered with carbamazepine and may be increased when
coadministered with guanfacine (Tenex), amitriptyline, or fluoxetine
(Prozac). Valproate can be displaced from plasma proteins by carbamazepine,
diazepam, and aspirin. Persons who are treated with anticoagulants (e.g.,
aspirin and warfarin [Coumadin]) should also be monitored when valproate
use is initiated to assess the development of any undesired augmentation of
the anticoagulation effects. Interactions of valproate with other drugs are
listed in Table 21-34.
Table 21-34
Interactions of Valproate with Other Drugs
Drug

Interactions Reported with Valproate

Lithium

Increased tremor

Antipsychotics

Increased sedation; increased extrapyramidal
effects; delirium and stupor (single report)

Clozapine

Increased sedation; confusional syndrome (single
report)

Carbamazepine Acute psychosis (single report); ataxia, nausea,




<<<PAGE 2256>>>

overview of the results of basic and clinical research. Int J
Neuropsychopharmacol. 2000;3:149–165.
Bech P, Allerup P, Larsen E, Csillag C, Licht R. Escitalopram versus
nortriptyline: how to let the clinical GENDEP data tell us what they
contained. Acta Psychiatr Scand. 2013;127(4):328–329.
Cettomai D, McArthur JC. Mirtazapine use in human immunodeficiency
virus-infected patients with progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy.
Arch Neurol. 2009;66(2):255–258.
Chambers CD, Hernandez-Diaz S, Van Marter LJ, Werler MM, Louik C.
Selective serotonin-reuptake inhibitors and risk of persistent pulmonary
hypertension of the newborn. N Engl J Med. 2006;354:579–587.
Charney DS, Delgado PL, Price LH, Heninger GR. The receptor sensitivity
hypothesis of antidepressant action: a review of antidepressant effects on
serotonin function. In: Brown SL, van Praag HM, eds. The Role of
Serotonin in Psychiatric Disorders. New York: Brunner/Mazel; 1991:29.
Choung RS, Cremonini F, Thapa P, Zinsmeister AR, Talley NJ. The effect of
short-term, low-dose tricyclic and tetracyclic antidepressant treatment on
satiation, postnutrient load gastrointestinal symptoms and gastric
emptying: a double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled trial.
Neurogastroenterol Motil. 2008;20:220–227.
Cipriani A, Barbui C, Brambilla P, Furukawa TA, Hotopf M. Are all
antidepressants really the same? The case of fluoxetine: a systematic
review. J Clin Psychiatry. 2006;67:850–864.
Cipriani A, Furukawa TA, Salanti G, Geddes JR, Higgins JPT. Comparative
efficacy and acceptability of 12 new-generation antidepressants: a
multiple-treatments meta-analysis. Lancet. 2009;373:746–758.
Ciraulo DA, Knapp C, Rotrosen J, Sarid-Segal O, Seliger C. Nefazodone
treatment of cocaine dependence with comorbid depressive symptoms.
Addiction. 2005;
100(Suppl 1):23–31.
Clayton A, Kornstein S, Prakash A, Mallinckrodt C, Wohlreich M. Changes
in sexual functioning associated with duloxetine, escitalopram, and
placebo in the treatment of patients with major depressive disorder. J Sex
Med. 2007;4:917–929.
Clayton AH, Montejo AL. Major depressive disorder, antidepressants, and
sexual dysfunction. J Clin Psychiatry. 2006;67(Suppl 6):33.




<<<PAGE 2258>>>

Diem SJ, Blackwell TL, Stone KL, Yaffe K, Haney EM. Use of
antidepressants and rates of hip bone loss in older women: the study of
osteoporotic fractures. Arch Intern Med. 2007;167:1240–1245.
Duman RS, Heninger GR, Nestler EJ. A molecular and cellular theory of
depression. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 1997;54:597–606.
Dykens JA, Jamieson JD, Marroquin LD, Nadanaciva S, Xu JJ, Dunn MC,
Smith AR, Will Y. In vitro assessment of mitochondrial dysfunction and
cytotoxicity of nefazodone, trazodone, and buspirone. Toxicol Sci.
2008;103(2):335–345.
Elkin I, Shea T, Watkins JT. NIMH treatment of depression collaborative
research program: general effectiveness of treatments. Arch Gen
Psychiatry. 1989;46:971.
Elmer LW, Bertoni JM. The increasing role of monoamine oxidase type B
inhibitors in Parkinson’s disease therapy. Expert Opin Pharmacother.
2008;9:2759–2772.
Fava M, Rush AJ, Wisniewski SR, Nierenberg AA, Alpert JE. A comparison
of mirtazapine and nortriptyline following two consecutive failed
medication treatments for depressed outpatients: a STAR*D report. Am J
Psychiatry. 2006;163(7):1161–1172.
Foley KF, DeSanty KP, Kast RE. Bupropion: pharmacology and therapeutic
applications. Expert Rev Neurother. 2006;6(9):1249–1265.
Frampton JE, Plosker GL. Duloxetine: a review of its use in the treatment of
major depressive disorder. CNS Drugs. 2007;21:581–609.
Frampton JE, Plosker GL, Masand PS. Selegiline transdermal system in the
treatment of major depressive disorder. Drugs. 2007;67:257.
Frank E, Kupfer DJ, Perel JM. Three-year outcomes for maintenance
therapies in recurrent depression. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 1990;47:1093.
Glassman AH, O’Connor CM, Califf RM, Swedberg K, Schwartz P.
Association of low bone mineral density with selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitor use by older men. Arch Intern Med. 2007;167(12):1246–1251.
Goldberg JF. A preliminary open trial of nefazodone added to mood
stabilizers for bipolar depression. J Affect Disord. 2013;144(1–2):176–178.
Goldberg JF, Thase ME. Monoamine oxidase inhibitors revisited: what you
should know. J Clin Psychiatry. 2013;74(2):189–191.
Hettema JM, Kornstein SG. Trazodone. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P,
eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed.




<<<PAGE 2263>>>

double-blind comparison of duloxetine and venlafaxine in the treatment of
patients with major depressive disorder. J Psychiatr Res. 2008;42:22–34.
Perkins KA, Karelitz JL, Jao NC, Stratton E. Possible reinforcement
enhancing effects of bupropion during initial smoking abstinence. Nicotine
Tob Res. 2013;15(6):
1141–1145.
Posternak M, Novak S, Stern A, Hennessey J, Joffe A. A pilot effectiveness
study: placebo-controlled trial of adjunctive L-triiodothyronine (T3) used
to accelerate and potentiate the antidepressant response. Int J
Neuropsychopharmacol. 2008;11(1):15–25.
Reeves RR, Ladner ME. Additional evidence of the abuse potential of
bupropion. J Clin Pharmacol. 2013;33(4):584–585.
Roose S, Laghrissi-Thode F, Kennedy JS, Nelson JC, Bigger JT. A
comparison of paroxetine and nortriptyline in depressed patients with
ischemic heart disease. JAMA. 1998;279:287–91.
Rynn M, Russell J, Erickson J, Detke MJ, Ball S. Efficacy and safety of
duloxetine in the treatment of generalized anxiety disorder: a flexible-dose,
progressive-titration, placebo-controlled trial. Depress
Anxiety.
2008;25:182–189.
Salahudeen MS, Wright C M, Peterson GM. “Esketamine: new hope for the
treatment of treatment-resistant depression? A narrative review.” Ther Adv
Drug
Saf.
2020;11:
2042098620937899.
https://doi.org/10.1177/2042098620937899.
Salsali M, Holt A, Baker GB. Inhibitory effects of the monoamine oxidase
inhibitor tranylcypromine on the cytochrome P450 enzymes CYP2C19,
CYP2C6, and CYP2D6. Cell Mol Neurobiol. 2004;24:63–76.
Sasada K, Iwamoto K, Kawano N, Kohmura K, Yamamoto M, Aleksic B,
Ebe K, Noda Y, Ozaki N. Effects of repeated dosing with mirtazapine,
trazodone, or placebo on driving performance and cognitive function in
healthy volunteers. Hum Psychopharmacol. 2013;28(3):281–286.
Scarff JR. “Use of Brexanolone for Postpartum Depression.” Innov Clin
Neurosci. 2019;16(11–12):32–35.
Schatzberg AF, Kremer C, Rodrigues HE, Murphy GM Jr. Double-blind,
randomized comparison of mirtazapine and paroxetine in elderly depressed
patients. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2002;10:541–550.




<<<PAGE 2299>>>

2001

The largest modern controlled trial of relapse prevention
post-ECT with continuation pharmacotherapy
demonstrates a significantly better outcome for
combined treatment with a tricyclic antidepressant
(nortriptyline) plus lithium compared with nortriptyline
alone or placebo during the first 6 months post-ECT.

ECT, electroconvulsive therapy.

Mechanism of Action
The induction of a bilateral generalized seizure is necessary for both the
beneficial and adverse effects of ECT. Although a seizure superficially seems
as though it is an all-or-none event, some data indicate that not all generalized
seizures involve all the neurons in deep brain structures (e.g., the basal
ganglia and the thalamus); recruitment of these deep neurons may be
necessary for full therapeutic benefit. After the generalized seizure, the
electroencephalogram (EEG) shows about 60 to 90 seconds of postictal
suppression. This period is followed by high-voltage delta and theta waves,
with a return to preseizure activity in about 30 minutes. During a series of
ECT treatments, the interictal EEG is generally slower and of greater
amplitude than usual, but the EEG returns to pretreatment appearance 1
month to 1 year after the end of the course of treatment.
Positron emission tomography (PET) studies of both cerebral blood flow
and glucose use have shown that during seizures, cerebral blood flow, use of
glucose and oxygen, and permeability of the blood–brain barrier increase.
After the seizure, blood flow and glucose metabolism are decreased, perhaps
most markedly in the frontal lobes. Some research indicates that the degree of
decrease in cerebral metabolism is correlated with therapeutic response.
Seizure foci in idiopathic epilepsy are hypometabolic during interictal
periods; ECT itself acts as an anticonvulsant because its administration is
associated with an increase in the seizure threshold as treatment progresses.
Recent data suggest that for 1 to 2 months following a session of ECT, EEGs
record a massive increase in slow-wave activity located over the prefrontal
cortex in patients who responded well to the ECT. High-intensity, bilateral
stimulation produced the best response; low-intensity, unilateral stimulation,


