<<<PAGE 513>>>

trial of 24 children with Tourette disorder, guanfacine was not superior to
placebo.
Atomoxetine, a selective norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor, was found to
reduce both tics and ADHD symptoms in a multicenter industry trial of 148
children. Atomoxetine also reduced both tics and ADHD in a subgroup of
patients in this study who had Tourette disorder. Additional studies are
needed to confirm the safety and efficacy of atomoxetine in the treatment of
children with Tourette disorder.
Given the frequent comorbidity of tic behaviors and obsessive-compulsive
symptoms or disorders, the SSRIs have been used alone or in combination
with antipsychotics in the treatment of Tourette disorder. They seem to be
useful, however, there have not been controlled trials yet to determine the
effect of SSRIs on tic reduction.
Although clinicians must weigh the risks and benefits of using stimulants
in cases of severe hyperactivity and comorbid tics, data suggest that
methylphenidate does not increase the rate or intensity of motor or vocal tics
in most children with hyperactivity and tic disorders.
ALTERNATIVE

AGENTS:

TETRABENAZINE,

TOPIRAMATE,

AND

TETRAHYDROCANNABINOL

Tetrabenazine. A vesicular monoamine transporter type 2 inhibitor,
tetrabenazine depletes presynaptic dopamine and serotonin and blocks
postsynaptic dopamine receptors. There are no randomized clinical trials of
this agent in the treatment of Tourette disorder in children; however, clinical
experience suggests that this agent may have benefit in tic reduction. In a
follow-up of 2 years of treatment in 77 children and adolescents, one study
reports tic reduction improvement in 80 percent of subjects. Side effects of
this agent include sedation, parkinsonism, depression, insomnia, anxiety, and
akathisia.
Topiramate. A GABAergic drug, used primarily as an anticonvulsant,
topiramate, was effective for reducing tics in a small randomized clinical trial
of children and adults with Tourette disorder. Side effects were minimal.
Although this does not confirm its efficacy, GABA-modulating agents
deserve further study in the treatment of tic disorders.




<<<PAGE 819>>>

abnormalities in memory and speech, we should suspect a temporal lobe
tumor.
COGNITION. Impaired intellectual functioning often accompanies the presence

of a brain tumor, regardless of its type or location.
LANGUAGE SKILLS. Disorders of language function may be severe, mainly if

tumor growth is rapid. Defects of language function often obscure all other
mental symptoms.
Table 3-34
Commonly Used Anticonvulsant Drugs
Drug

Use

Carbamazepine Generalized tonic–clonic, partial

Maintenance
Dosage
(mg/day)
600–1,200

Clonazepam

Absence, atypical myoclonic

2–12

Ethosuximide

Absence

1,000–2,000

Gabapentin

Complex partial seizures
(augmentation)

900–3,600

Lamotrigine

Complex partial seizures,
generalized (augmentation)

300–500

Oxcarbazepine Partial

600–2,400

Phenobarbital

Generalized tonic–clonic

100–200

Phenytoin

Generalized tonic–clonic, partial,
status epilepticus

300–500

Primidone

Partial

750–1,000

Tiagabine

Generalized

32–56

Topiramate

Complex partial seizures
(augmentation)

200–400




<<<PAGE 914>>>

Interventions) demonstrated that naltrexone improves clinical outcomes, and
a Cochrane review of naltrexone concluded that naltrexone was effective in
reducing heavy drinking days. The typical dose is 50 mg/day, and side effects
include mild GI upset and lethargy.
The second medication, acamprosate, antagonizes neuronal overactivity
related to the excitatory neurotransmitter glutamate, at least in part, by acting
as an antagonist to N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptors. Acamprosate
may diminish mild anxiety, mood swings, and other sleep difficulties
associated with the protracted withdrawal syndrome observed after the first 4
to 5 days of abstinence. The typical dose is about 2,000 mg divided into three
doses per day and is associated with relatively mild side effects of GI
problems such as diarrhea.
A third possible drug of interest is the alcohol-sensitizing agent disulfiram.
Disulfiram is given in daily doses of 250 mg before discharging the patient
from the intensive first phase of outpatient rehabilitation or inpatient care.
The goal is to place the patient in a condition in which drinking alcohol
precipitates an uncomfortable physical reaction, including nausea, vomiting,
and a burning sensation in the face and stomach. Few data support
disulfiram’s effectiveness, most likely because patients stop it when they
resume drinking. Many clinicians have stopped routinely prescribing the
agent, partly in recognition of the dangers associated with the drug itself:
mood swings, rare instances of psychosis, the possibility of increased
peripheral neuropathies, the relatively rare occurrence of other significant
neuropathies, and potentially fatal hepatitis. Moreover, we should not give
disulfiram to patients with preexisting heart disease, cerebral thrombosis,
diabetes, and some other conditions, because an alcohol reaction to the
disulfiram could be fatal.
Table 4-15 gives a summary of medications used for alcohol dependence.
Two other medications, while not yet approved for the treatment of alcohol
use disorders, are worth brief mention. Several studies using the
anticonvulsant topiramate have reported improvement in drinking patterns.
Additionally, some data suggest that the 5-HT3 ondansetron might be
beneficial in alcohol use disorder treatment. No evidence exists that
antidepressant medications, such as selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
(SSRIs), lithium, or antipsychotic medications, are significantly effective in




<<<PAGE 989>>>

that chronic cocaine use alters the function of multiple neurotransmitter
systems, especially the dopaminergic and serotonergic transmitters regulating
hedonic tone, and that cocaine induces a state of relative dopaminergic
deficiency. Although the evidence for such alterations in dopaminergic
function has been growing, it has been challenging to demonstrate that agents
theoretically capable of modifying dopamine function can alter the course of
treatment.
Tricyclic antidepressant drugs yielded some positive results when used
early in treatment with minimally drug-dependent patients; however, they are
of little or no use inducing abstinence in moderate or severe cases.
Also tried but not confirmed effective in controlled studies are other
antidepressants, such as bupropion, MAOIs, SSRIs, antipsychotics, lithium,
several different calcium channel inhibitors, and anticonvulsants. Several
studies have found increased rates of abstinence with the use of topiramate
for cocaine use disorders; however, there are also negative trials of
topiramate in this population.
Disulfiram has demonstrated potential benefits in the pharmacotherapy of
cocaine use disorder. Disulfiram has long been used in the treatment of
alcohol use disorder because it inhibits an enzyme involved in the
metabolism of ethanol. Though disulfiram was initially considered a potential
treatment option for individuals with both alcohol and cocaine use disorders,
studies demonstrated that disulfiram appears to have a direct effect on the
metabolism of dopamine and cocaine itself; it acts as an inhibitor of
dopamine β-hydroxylase, thereby slowing the breakdown of synaptic
dopamine and increasing dopamine levels. Individuals who are coadministered cocaine and disulfiram describe more negative responses to
cocaine, including anxiety, restlessness, and paranoia. These reactions may,
in part, explain the effects of disulfiram in decreasing cocaine use. Issues
affecting treatment response to disulfiram include challenges with treatment
nonadherence, risks of inducing psychotic symptoms with combined cocaine
and disulfiram use, and risks of serious medical consequences if a patient
were to consume alcohol, given the frequent co-occurrence of alcohol and
cocaine use disorders.

EPIDEMIOLOGY




<<<PAGE 1390>>>

stating he could not go on alone. (Courtesy of J. W. Katzman, M.D., and
C. M. A. Geppert, M.D., Ph.D., M.P.H.)

TREATMENT APPROACH
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder
We list some of the most common treatments for PTSD and related disorders
in Table 10-7.
Pharmacotherapy. Currently, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
(SSRIs), particularly sertraline and paroxetine, have the most robust evidence
for efficacy. There are promising initial findings for the noradrenergic and
serotonergic reuptake inhibitor venlafaxine, the atypical antipsychotic
risperidone, and the anticonvulsant topiramate. We lack evidence for the
effectiveness of benzodiazepines, despite their continued use in practice; one
meta-analysis went so far as to consider benzodiazepines relatively
contraindicated in this population. Finally, the alpha 1-adrenergic antagonist
prazosin and the atypical antipsychotics show some efficacy in treatmentresistant PTSD, and prazosin shows effectiveness for treating nightmares.
Insomnia is prevalent and disabling in chronic PTSD, with low-dose
trazodone preferable to benzodiazepines. The orexin antagonist suvorexant is
promising for managing trauma-related insomnia.
Table 10-7
Treatments for PTSD
Pharmacologic
interventions

Strong evidence
SSRIs (sertraline, paroxetine)
Promising initial evidence
SNRI (venlafaxine)
Atypical antipsychotic (risperidone)
Anticonvulsant (topiramate)
Limited evidence
Alpha 1-adrenergic antagonist (prazosin)




<<<PAGE 1523>>>

antidepressants that may be helpful include other SSRIs (although concerns
about prolonged QT intervals with higher doses limit the utility of citalopram
in this population), TCAs (particularly amitriptyline and desipramine),
trazodone, and monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs). Bupropion is
contraindicated due to an increased risk of seizure in this population. In
general, most of the antidepressants other than fluoxetine have been effective
at dosages usually given in the treatment of depressive disorders. Medication
is helpful in patients with comorbid depressive disorders and bulimia
nervosa. Topiramate may have some efficacy in reducing binge episodes in
bulimia nervosa, as may lisdexamfetamine. Evidence indicates that CBT and
medications (particularly fluoxetine) are the most effective combination.
Treatment of Binge-Eating Disorder
Psychotherapy. CBT is the most effective psychological treatment for
binge-eating disorder and should be considered a first-line treatment. CBT
can lead to decreases in binge eating and associated problems (e.g.,
depression); however, studies have not shown marked weight loss as a result
of CBT. CBT combined with psychopharmacological treatments such as
SSRIs shows better results than CBT alone. Exercise has also shown a
reduction in binge eating when combined with CBT. Interpersonal
psychotherapy (IPT) is also effective in the treatment of binge-eating
disorder; however, therapy focuses more on the interpersonal problems that
contribute to the disorder rather than disturbances in eating behavior. There is
also some evidence for the use of dialectical behavior therapy for bingeeating disorder.
Psychopharmacotherapy. Symptoms of binge eating may benefit from
medication treatment, with strong evidence supporting the use of
lisdexamfetamine for both weight loss and reduction of binge episodes.
Antidepressant medications have demonstrated improvement in binge eating,
but typically do not result in sustained weight loss; these include fluoxetine,
fluvoxamine, citalopram, escitalopram, sertraline, duloxetine, and bupropion.
The anticonvulsants topiramate and zonisamide may improve binge-eating
disorder, particularly with moderate weight loss. Topiramate may also reduce
binge episodes.




<<<PAGE 1902>>>

Cognitive Impairment. Cognitive impairment means a disturbance in the
capacity to think. Some agents, such as the benzodiazepine agonists, are
recognized as causes of cognitive impairment. Other widely used
psychotropics, such as the SSRIs, lamotrigine (Lamictal), topiramate
(Topamax), gabapentin (Neurontin), lithium, TCAs, and bupropion, however,
are also associated with varying degrees of memory impairment and wordfinding difficulties. In contrast to the benzodiazepine-induced anterograde
amnesia, these agents cause a more subtle type of absent-mindedness. Drugs
with anticholinergic properties are likely to worsen memory performance.
Sweating. Severe perspiration unrelated to ambient temperature is
associated with TCAs, SSRIs, and venlafaxine. This side effect is often
socially disabling. Attempts can be made to treat this side effect with alpha
agents, such as terazosin (Hytrin) and oxybutynin (Ditropan).
Cardiovascular Disturbances. Newer agents are less likely to have
direct cardiac effects. Many older agents, such as TCAs and phenothiazines,
affected BP and cardiac conduction. Thioridazine (Mellaril), which has been
in use for decades, has been shown to prolong the QTc interval in a doserelated manner and may increase the risk of sudden death by delaying
ventricular repolarization and causing torsades de pointes. Newer drugs are
now routinely scrutinized for evidence of cardiac effects. A promising
treatment for psychosis, sertindole (Serlect), was not marketed because the
FDA would have required a black box warning. Slight QTc effects noted with
ziprasidone (Geodon) delayed the marketing of that drug. Clozapine can
cause myocarditis in rare cases.
Rash. Any medication is a potential source of a drug rash. Some
psychotropics, such as carbamazepine (Equetro, Tegretol) and lamotrigine,
have been linked to an increased risk of severe exfoliative dermatitis.
Commonly referred to as Stevens–Johnson syndrome, this condition is a
systemic, immune-mediated reaction that can prove fatal or result in
permanent scarring or blindness. All patients should be informed about the
potential seriousness of widespread lesions that occur above the neck, that
involve the mucous membranes, and that may be associated with fever and




<<<PAGE 2097>>>

OTHER ANTICONVULSANTS
The anticonvulsants described in this section were developed for the
treatment of epilepsy but were also found to have beneficial effects in
psychiatric disorders. Also, these agents are used as skeletal muscle relaxants
and in neurogenic pain. These drugs have a variety of mechanisms, including
increasing GABAergic function or decreasing glutamatergic function. This
section includes seven anticonvulsants: gabapentin (Neurontin), levetiracetam
(Keppra), pregabalin (Lyrica), tiagabine (Gabitril), topiramate (Topamax),
and zonisamide (Zonegran), as well as one of the first used anticonvulsants,
phenytoin (Dilantin). Carbamazepine (Tegretol), valproate (Depakene,
Depakote), lamotrigine (Lamictal), and oxcarbazepine (Trileptal) are
discussed in separate sections.
In 2008, the FDA issued a warning that these drugs may increase the risk
of suicidal ideation or act in some persons compared with placebo; however,
the relative risk for suicidality was higher in patients with epilepsy compared
with those with psychiatric disorders. However, some published data
contradict this warning. These studies suggest that anticonvulsants may have
a protective effect on suicidal thoughts in bipolar disorder. Considering the
inherently increased risk of suicide in persons with bipolar disorder,
clinicians should be aware of these warnings.
Gabapentin
Gabapentin was first introduced as an antiepileptic drug and was found to
have sedative effects that were useful in some psychiatric disorders,
especially insomnia. It was also found to be beneficial in reducing
neuropathic pain, including postherpetic neuralgia. It is used in anxiety
disorders (social phobia and panic disorder), but not as the primary
intervention in mania or treatment-resistant mood disorders.
Pharmacologic Actions. Gabapentin circulates in the blood primarily
unbound and is not appreciably metabolized in humans. It is eliminated
unchanged by renal excretion and can be removed by hemodialysis. Food
only moderately affects the rate and extent of absorption. Clearance is
decreased in elderly persons, requiring dosage adjustments. Gabapentin




<<<PAGE 2099>>>

general approach is to start with 300 mg on day 1, increase to 600 mg on day
2, 900 mg on day 3, and subsequently increase up to 1,800 mg/day in divided
doses as needed to relieve symptoms. Final total daily doses tend to be
between 1,200 and 2,400 mg/day, but occasionally results may be achieved
with dosages as low as 200 to 300 mg/day, especially in elderly persons.
Sedation is usually the limiting factor in determining the dosage. Some
patients have taken dosages as high as 4,800 mg/day.
Gabapentin is available as 100-, 300-, and 400-mg capsules and as 600and 800-mg tablets. A 250-mg/5-mL oral solution is also available. Although
abrupt discontinuation of gabapentin does not cause withdrawal effects, the
use of all anticonvulsant drugs should be gradually tapered.
Topiramate
Topiramate (Topamax) was developed as an anticonvulsant and was found
useful in a variety of psychiatric and neurologic conditions, including
migraine prevention, treatment of obesity, bulimia, binge eating, and alcohol
dependence.
Pharmacologic Actions. Topiramate has GABAergic effects and
increases cerebral GABA in humans. It has 80 percent oral bioavailability
and is not significantly altered by food. It is 15 percent protein-bound, and
about 70 percent of the drug is eliminated by renal excretion. With renal
insufficiency, topiramate clearance decreases by about 50 percent, so the
dosage needs to be decreased. It has a half-life of around 24 hours.
Therapeutic Indications. Topiramate is used mainly as an antiepileptic
medication and has been found superior to placebo as monotherapy in
patients with seizure disorders. It is also used in the prevention of migraine,
smoking cessation, pain syndromes (e.g., low back pain), PTSD, and
essential tremor. The drug has been associated with weight loss, and that fact
has been used to counteract the weight gain caused by many psychotropic
drugs. It has also been used in general obesity and the treatment of bulimia
and binge-eating disorder. Self-mutilating behavior may be decreased in
borderline personality disorder. It is of little or no benefit in the treatment of
psychotic disorders. In one study, the combination of topiramate with
bupropion (Wellbutrin) showed some efficacy in bipolar depression, but




<<<PAGE 2100>>>

double-blind, placebo-controlled trials failed to demonstrate topiramate
monotherapy efficacy in acute mania in adults.
Precautions and Adverse Reactions. The most common adverse
effects of topiramate include paresthesias, weight loss, somnolence, anorexia,
dizziness, and memory problems. Sometimes disturbances in the sense of
taste occur. In many cases, the adverse effects are mild to moderate and can
be attenuated by decreasing the dose. No deaths have been reported during an
overdose. The drug affects acid–base balance (low serum bicarbonate), which
can be associated with cardiac arrhythmias and the formation of renal calculi
in about 1.5 percent of cases. Patients taking the drug should be encouraged
to drink plenty of fluids. It is not known if the drug passes through the
placenta or is present in breast milk, and pregnant women or nursing mothers
should avoid it.
Drug Interactions. Topiramate has few drug interactions with other
anticonvulsant drugs. Topiramate may increase phenytoin concentrations up
to 25 percent and valproic acid 11 percent; it does not affect the concentration
of carbamazepine, phenobarbital (Luminal), or primidone. Topiramate
concentrations are decreased by 40 to 48 percent with concomitant
administration of carbamazepine or phenytoin. We should not combine
topiramate with other carbonic anhydrase inhibitors, as it increases the risk of
nephrolithiasis or heat-related problems (oligohidrosis and hyperthermia).
These include acetazolamide (Diamox) or dichlorphenamide (Daranide).
Laboratory Interferences. Topiramate does not interfere with any
laboratory tests.
Dosages and Clinical Guidelines. Topiramate is available as unscored
25-, 100-, and 200-mg tablets. Topiramate dosage is titrated gradually over 8
weeks to a maximum of 200 mg twice a day to reduce the risk of adverse
cognitive and sedative effects. Off-label topiramate is typically used
adjunctively, starting with 25 mg at bedtime and increasing weekly by 25 mg
as necessary and tolerated. Final doses in efforts to promote weight loss are
often between 75 and 150 mg/day at bedtime. Doses higher than 400 mg are
not associated with increased efficacy. All of the doses can be given at




<<<PAGE 2185>>>

as the development of alternative antialcohol medications, have been the
limiting factors for the broader use of disulfiram. Unlike disulfiram,
acamprosate, the other drug discussed in this section, does not produce
aversive side effects. Acamprosate is now prescribed more commonly than
disulfiram in outpatient settings, but disulfiram is prescribed more often in
inpatient settings because it helps facilitate initial abstinence.
Other drugs that are useful in reducing alcohol consumption include
naltrexone (ReVia, Trexan), nalmefene (Revex), topiramate (Topamax), and
gabapentin (Neurontin). These agents are discussed in their respective
sections.
Disulfiram
Pharmacologic Actions. Disulfiram is almost completely absorbed from
the GI tract after oral administration. Its half-life is estimated to be 60 to 120
hours. Therefore, it may take 1 or 2 weeks to eliminate disulfiram from the
body after taking the last dose.
The metabolism of ethanol proceeds through oxidation via alcohol
dehydrogenase to the formation of acetaldehyde, which is further metabolized
to acetyl-coenzyme A (acetyl-CoA) by aldehyde dehydrogenase. Disulfiram
is an aldehyde dehydrogenase inhibitor that interferes with the metabolism of
alcohol by producing a marked increase in blood acetaldehyde concentration.
The accumulation of acetaldehyde (to a level up to 10 times higher than
occurs in the normal metabolism of alcohol) produces a wide array of
unpleasant reactions, called the disulfiram–alcohol reaction, characterized by
nausea, throbbing headache, vomiting, hypertension, flushing, sweating,
thirst, dyspnea, tachycardia, chest pain, vertigo, and blurred vision. The
reaction occurs almost immediately after the ingestion of one alcoholic drink
and may last from 30 minutes to 2 hours.
BLOOD CONCENTRATIONS IN RELATION TO ACTION. Plasma concentrations of

disulfiram vary among individuals because of several factors, most notably
age and hepatic function. In general, the severity of disulfiram–alcohol
reaction is proportional to the amount of the ingested disulfiram and alcohol.
Nevertheless, disulfiram plasma levels are rarely obtained in clinical practice.
The positive correlation between plasma concentrations of alcohol and the




<<<PAGE 2203>>>

these enzymes by memantine. No pharmacokinetic interactions with drugs
metabolized by these enzymes are expected.
Because memantine is eliminated in part by tubular secretion,
coadministration of drugs that use the same renal cationic system, including
hydrochlorothiazide triamterene (Dyrenium), cimetidine (Tagamet),
ranitidine (Zantac), quinidine, and nicotine, could potentially result in altered
plasma levels of both agents. Coadministration of memantine with a
combination of hydrochlorothiazide and triamterene did not affect the
bioavailability of either memantine or triamterene, and the bioavailability of
hydrochlorothiazide decreased by 20 percent.
Urine pH is altered by diet, drugs (e.g., carbonic anhydrase inhibitors,
topiramate [Topamax], sodium bicarbonate), and the clinical state of the
patient (e.g., renal tubular acidosis or severe infections of the urinary tract).
The clearance of memantine is reduced by about 80 percent under alkaline
urine conditions at pH 8. Therefore, alterations of urine pH toward the
alkaline condition may lead to an accumulation of the drug with a possible
increase in adverse effects. Hence, memantine should be used with caution
under these conditions.
Laboratory Interferences
No laboratory interferences have been associated with the use of memantine.
Dosage and Clinical Guidelines
Memantine is available in 5- and 10-mg tablets, with a recommended starting
dose of 5 mg daily. The recommended target dose is 20 mg/day. The drug is
administered twice daily in separate doses with 5-mg increment increases
weekly depending on tolerability.
Patients with mild to moderate disease receiving memantine in
combination with a cholinesterase inhibitor have not been found to
experience significantly greater benefit in cognition or overall function than
those who receive a cholinesterase inhibitor alone.

21.9 Drugs Used to Treat Sexual




<<<PAGE 2230>>>

with all sympathomimetics, contraindications include advanced
arteriosclerosis, cardiovascular disease, moderate to severe hypertension,
hyperthyroidism, known hypersensitivity or idiosyncrasy to the
sympathomimetic amines, agitated states, and glaucoma.
The drug should be prescribed with caution to patients with a history of
drug abuse. Hypertensive crises may result if phentermine is used during or
within 14 days following the administration of MAOIs. Insulin requirements
in diabetes mellitus may be altered in association with the use of phentermine
hydrochloride and the concomitant dietary regimen. Phentermine
hydrochloride may decrease the hypotensive effect of guanethidine.
Phentermine was pregnancy Category X in the former FDA classification
system and thus contraindicated during pregnancy. Studies have not been
performed with phentermine hydrochloride to determine the potential for
carcinogenesis, mutagenesis, or impairment of fertility.
Phentermine should be taken on an empty stomach once daily, before
breakfast. Tablets may be broken or cut in half but should not be crushed. It
should be dosed early in the day to avoid disrupting normal sleep patterns. If
taking more than one dose a day, the last dose should be taken approximately
4 to 6 hours before going to bed. The recommended dose of phentermine may
be different for different patients. Adults under age 60 taking phentermine
using 15- to 37.5-mg capsules should take them once per day before breakfast
or 1 to 2 hours after breakfast. Those using 15- to 37.5-mg tablets should take
them once per day before breakfast or 1 to 2 hours after breakfast. Instead of
taking it once a day, some patients may take 15 to 37.5 mg in divided doses a
half hour before meals. An oral resin formulation is available in 15- and 30mg capsules, which should be taken once per day before breakfast.
Phentermine/Topiramate Extended Release (Qsymia).
This drug is a combination of phentermine and topiramate (Topamax). The
FDA approved the phentermine/topiramate combination in 2012 as an
extended-release formulation. Both active agents in this formulation are
associated with weight loss through separate mechanisms.
Adverse events associated with the use of this drug may include, but are
not limited to, paresthesia, dizziness, dysgeusia, insomnia, constipation, dry
mouth, kidney stones, metabolic acidosis, and secondary angle-closure
glaucoma. The use of this drug is associated with a fivefold increased risk of




<<<PAGE 2231>>>

infants with cleft palate and was classified as pregnancy Category X in the
former FDA classification system. It can only be prescribed by clinicians
who have been certified in the use of this drug.
It is available as a tablet and should be administered once daily in the
morning with or without food. Avoid dosing with the drug in the evening due
to the possibility of insomnia. The recommended dose is as follows: Start
treatment with 3.75 mg/
23 mg (phentermine/topiramate extended-release) daily for 14 days; after 14
days, increase the dose to 7.5 mg/46 mg once daily. Evaluate for weight loss
after 12 weeks of treatment at the 7.5 mg/
46 mg dose. If at least 3 percent of baseline body weight has not been lost on
7.5 mg/46 mg, discontinue the drug or escalate the dose. To escalate the dose,
increase to 11.25 mg/69 mg daily for 14 days, followed by dosing 15 mg/92
mg daily. Evaluate weight loss following dose escalation to 15 mg/92 mg
after an additional 12 weeks of treatment. If at least 5 percent of baseline
body weight has not been lost on 15 mg/92 mg, discontinue the medication
gradually.
Phendimetrazine (Bontril PDM, Adipost, Phendiet, Statobex).
Phendimetrazine is a sympathomimetic amine that is closely related to the
amphetamines. It is classified by the Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA) as a
Schedule III controlled substance.
The overall prescribing of this agent is limited. The most commonly used
formulation is the 105-mg extended-release capsule, which approximates the
action of three 35-mg immediate-release doses taken at 4-hour intervals. The
average half-life of elimination, when studied under controlled conditions, is
about 3.7 hours for both the extended-release and immediate-release forms.
The absorption half-life of the drug from the immediate-release 35-mg
phendimetrazine tablets is appreciably more rapid than the absorption rate of
the drug from the extended-release formulation. The primary route of
elimination is via the kidneys, where most of the drug and metabolites are
excreted.
Phendimetrazine contraindications are similar to those of phentermine.
They include a history of cardiovascular disease (e.g., coronary artery
disease, stroke, arrhythmias, congestive heart failure, uncontrolled
hypertension, pulmonary hypertension); use during or within 14 days




<<<PAGE 2234>>>

minimize these effects. Also, they should eat a reduced-calorie diet. Because
of this side effect, orlistat can be used with high-fat content diets to treat
constipation that results from treatment with some psychotropic drugs, such
as the TCAs. Side effects are most severe when beginning therapy and may
decrease in frequency with time. Hepatic and renal injuries are potentially
severe side effects of orlistat use. In 2010, new safety information about rare
cases of severe liver injury was added to the product label of orlistat. The rate
of acute kidney injury is more common among orlistat users than nonusers. It
should be used with caution in patients with impaired liver function and renal
function, as well as those with an obstructed bile duct and pancreatic disease.
Orlistat is contraindicated in malabsorption syndromes, hypersensitivity to
orlistat, reduced gallbladder function, and in pregnancy and breastfeeding.
Orlistat was rated pregnancy Category X in the former FDA classification
system.
The use of orlistat inhibits the absorption of fat-soluble vitamins and other
fat-soluble nutrients. Multivitamin supplements that contain vitamins A, D,
E, K, as well as β-carotene, should be taken once a day, preferably at
bedtime.
Orlistat can reduce plasma levels of the immunosuppressant cyclosporine
(Sandimmune), so the two drugs should, therefore, not be administered
concomitantly. Orlistat can also impair the absorption of the antiarrhythmic
amiodarone (Nexterone).
At the standard prescription dose of 120 mg three times daily before meals,
orlistat prevents approximately 30 percent of dietary fat from being absorbed.
Higher doses have not been shown to produce more pronounced effects.
An over-the-counter formulation of orlistat (Alli) is available as 60-mg
capsules—half the dosage of prescription orlistat.
Drugs without U.S. Food and Drug Administration Approval for
Weight Loss
Topiramate. Topiramate and zonisamide (Zonegran) are discussed more
fully among the mood stabilizers earlier in this chapter, but are mentioned
here because both agents can have a substantial effect on weight loss.
Topiramate is approved as an antiepileptic drug and for prevention of
migraine headaches in adults. The degree of weight loss associated with




<<<PAGE 2235>>>

topiramate may be comparable to the weight loss that other FDA-approved
antiobesity drugs induce. Small studies and extensive anecdotal reports
indicate that topiramate can help to offset weight gain associated with SSRIs
and SGA drugs. Its impact on body weight may be due to its effects on both
appetite suppression and satiety enhancement. These may be the result of a
combination of pharmacologic effects including augmenting GABA activity,
modulation of voltage-gated ion channels, inhibition of excitatory glutamate
receptors, or inhibition of carbonic anhydrase.
The duration and dosage of treatment affect the weight loss benefits of
topiramate. Weight loss is higher when the drug is prescribed at doses of 100
to 200 mg/day for more than a month compared with less than a month. In a
large study, it was shown that compared to those who took a placebo,
topiramate-treated patients were seven times more likely to lose more than 10
percent of their body weight. In clinical practice, many patients experience
weight loss at a starting dose of 25 mg/day.
The most common side effects of topiramate are paresthesias, typically
around the mouth, impaired taste (taste perversion), and psychomotor
disturbances, including slowed cognition and reduced physical movements.
Concentration and memory impairment, often characterized by word finding
and name recall problems, is often reported. Some patients may experience
emotional lability and mood changes. Medical side effects include increased
risk of kidney stones and acute-angle closure glaucoma. Patients should
report any change in visual acuity. Those with a history of kidney stones
should be instructed to drink adequate amounts of fluid.
Topiramate is available as 25-, 50- 100-, and 200-mg tablets and as 15-,
25-, and 50-mg capsules.
Zonisamide. Zonisamide is a sulfonamide-related drug, similar in many
ways to topiramate. Its exact mechanism of action is not known. Like
topiramate, it can cause cognitive problems, but the incidence is lower than
that with topiramate.
Zonisamide was assigned to pregnancy Category C in the former FDA
classification system. Animal studies have revealed evidence of
teratogenicity. Fetal abnormalities or embryo-fetal deaths have been reported
in animal tests at zonisamide dosage and maternal plasma levels similar to, or
lower than, human therapeutic levels. Therefore, the use of this drug in




<<<PAGE 2236>>>

human pregnancy may expose the fetus to significant risk.
The most common side effects include drowsiness, loss of appetite,
dizziness, headache, nausea, and agitation or irritability. Zonisamide has also
been associated with hypohidrosis. There is a 2 to 4 percent risk of kidney
stones. Other drugs known to provoke stones, such as topiramate or
acetazolamide (Diamox), should not be combined with zonisamide. Severe,
but rare, adverse drug reactions include Stevens–Johnson syndrome, toxic
epidermal necrolysis, and metabolic acidosis.
Typical dosing for weight loss has not been established. Generally,
zonisamide is started at 100 mg at night for 2 weeks, and increased by 100
mg daily every 2 weeks to a target dose of 200 to 600 mg/day in one or two
daily doses.
Metformin (Glucophage). Metformin is a medication for type 2 diabetes
mellitus. Its actions include reduction of hepatic glucose production, reduced
intestinal glucose absorption, increased insulin sensitivity, and improved
peripheral glucose uptake and regulation. It does not increase insulin
secretion.
When used as an adjunct to SGAs, it has consistently been shown to
reduce body weight and waist circumference. Metformin probably has the
best evidence of therapeutic benefit for the treatment of antipsychotic druginduced metabolic syndrome. In several studies, metformin has been shown
to attenuate or reverse some of the weight gain induced by antipsychotics.
The degree of effect on body weight compares favorably with the effect of
other treatment options that are approved for weight reduction. The weight
loss effect of adjunctive metformin appears to be stronger in drug-naive
patients treated with SGA medications. This effect is most evident for those
being treated with clozapine (Clozaril) and olanzapine (Zyprexa). Based on
the existing evidence, if weight gain occurs after SGA initiation, despite
lifestyle intervention, metformin should be considered.
Common side effects include nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, and loss
of appetite. GI side effects can be mitigated by dividing the dose, taking the
drug after meals, or using delayed-release formulations.
One serious treatment risk is that of lactic acidosis. This side effect is more
common in those with reduced renal function than other patients. Although
very rare (approximately 9 in 100,000 persons/yr), it has a 50 percent




<<<PAGE 2270>>>

Jefferson JW, Greist JH. Lithium. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds.
Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Vol. 2.
Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:3132
Johnson BA, Rosenthal N, Capece JA. Improvement of physical health and
quality of life of alcohol-dependent individuals with topiramate treatment:
US multisite randomized controlled trial. Arch Intern Med.
2008;168:1188–1199.
Johnson BA, Rosenthal N, Capece JA, Wiegand F, Mao L. Topiramate for
treating alcohol dependence: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA.
2007;298(14):1641.
Kamalinia G, Brand S, Ghaeli P, Abedi N, Bajoghli H, Sharifi V, Zahiroddin
A, Amini M, Rouini MR, Holsboer-Trachsler E, Mohammadpoor AH.
Serum levels of sodium valproate in patients suffering from bipolar
disorders: comparing acute and maintenance phases of mania.
Pharmacopsychiatry. 2013;46(3):83–87.
Kato T, Ishiwata M, Mori K, Washizuka S, Tajima O. Mechanisms of altered
Ca2+ signaling in transformed lymphoblastoid cells from patients with
bipolar disorder. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol. 2003;6:379–389.
Ketter TA, Brooks JO, Hoblyn JC. Effectiveness of lamotrigine in bipolar
disorder in a clinical setting. J Psychiatr Res. 2008;43:13–23.
Ketter TA, Greist JH, Graham JA, Roberts JN, Thompson TR. The effect of
dermatologic precautions on the incidence of rash with addition of
lamotrigine in the treatment of bipolar I disorder: a randomized trial. J Clin
Psychiatry. 2006;67(3):400–406.
Ketter TA, Wang PW. Anticonvulsants: Gabapentin, levetiracetam,
pregabalin, tiagabine, topiramate, zonisamide. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA,
Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry.
9th ed. Vol. 2. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins;
2009:3021.
Ketter TA, Wang PW. Lamotrigine. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds.
Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Vol. 2.
Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:3127.
Ketter TA, Wang PW, Becker OV, Nowakowska C, Yang YS. The diverse
roles of anticonvulsants in bipolar disorders. Ann Clin Psychiatry.
2003;15:95–108.
Klitgaard H. Epilepsy therapy: anticonvulsants, lessons learned and unmet




<<<PAGE 2271>>>

medical needs. Expert Rev Neurother. 2013;13(1):13–14.
Kozaric-Kovacic D, Eterovic M. Lamotrigine abolished aggression in a
patient with treatment-resistant posttraumatic stress disorder. Clin
Neuropharmacol. 2013;36(3):94–95.
Kremer I, Vass A, Gorelik I, Bar G, Blanaru M, Javitt DC. Placebocontrolled trial of lamotrigine added to conventional and atypical
antipsychotics in schizophrenia. Biol Psychiatry. 2004;56(6):441–446.
Kushner SF, Khan A, Lane R, Olson WH. Topiramate monotherapy in the
management of acute mania: results of four double-blind placebocontrolled trials. Bipolar Disord. 2006;8(1):15–27.
Livingston C, Rampes H. Lithium: a review of its metabolic adverse effects.
J Psychopharmacol. 2006;20:347–355.
McClellan J, Kowatch R, Findling RL, Work Group on Quality Issues.
Practice parameter for the assessment and treatment of children and
adolescents with bipolar disorder. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry.
2007;46:107–125.
McElroy SL, Hudson JI, Capece JA, Beyers K, Fisher AC. Topiramate for
the treatment of binge eating disorder associated with obesity: a placebocontrolled study. Biol Psychiatry. 2007;61(9):1039–1048.
McElroy SL, Kotwal R, Guerdjikova AI, Welge JA, Nelson EB. Zonisamide
in the treatment of binge eating disorder with obesity: a randomized
controlled trial. J Clin Psychiatry. 2006;67(12):1897–906.
Mease PJ, Russell IJ, Arnold LM. A randomized, double-blind, placebocontrolled, phase III trial of pregabalin in the treatment of patients with
fibromyalgia. J Rheumatol. 2008;35:502–514.
Merideth CH. A single-center, double-blind, placebo-controlled evaluation of
lamotrigine in the treatment of obesity in adults. J Clin Psychiatry.
2006;67(2):258–262.
Nahorski SR. Pharmacology of intracellular signaling pathways. Br J
Pharmacol. 2006;147:S38.
Perucca P, Mula M. Antiepileptic drug effects on mood and behavior:
molecular targets. Epilepsy Behav. 2013;26(3):440–449.
Post RM, Frye MA. Carbamazepine. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds.
Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Vol. 2.
Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:3073.
Post RM, Frye MA. Valproate. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds.




<<<PAGE 3757>>>

emotional and social development, 893
language and cognitive development, 893
parenting challenges, 894
sexual development, 893–894
gender identity, 894
gender role, 894
toilet training, 894
Token economy, 775, 794, 1018
Token Test, 53t, 54
Tolerance, 604
Toluene embryopathy, 327
Topamax. See Topiramate
Topiramate, 253t, 600, 607, 664–665, 709
in alcohol use disorder treatment, 283
for tic disorder, 161
Topographical theory, limitations of, 1060
Topographic quantitative electroencephalography (QEEG), 1000
Tourette disorder, 155–162, 156t, 609, 694
clinical assessment tools in, 156, 156t
course and prognosis, 157, 159
diagnosis and clinical features, 155–156, 156t
differential diagnosis, 157, 158–159t
epidemiology, 161
etiology, 161–162
European clinical guidelines for, 159
pathology and laboratory examination, 157
tics in, 155–156
treatment, 159–161
Toxemia of pregnancy, 106
Toxic epidermal necrolysis, 709
Toxicology studies, 61–63, 62t
alcohol, 62–63
drug abuse, 62, 62t
environmental toxins, 63
volatile solvent inhalation, 63
Toxoplasmosis
in pregnancy, 104


