<<<PAGE 511>>>

affinity for dopamine D2 and serotonin 5-HT2 receptors, is the most wellstudied atypical antipsychotic in the treatment of tics. There is considerable
evidence for its efficacy. Multiple randomized, controlled studies in children
and adolescents have shown favorable results compared to placebo as well as
in head-to-head studies with the typical antipsychotics haloperidol and
pimozide. Risperidone was associated with fewer adverse events compared to
typical antipsychotics; however, it can cause weight gain, metabolic side
effects, and hyperprolactinemia. In a randomized, double-blind, parallelgroup study of Tourette disorder comparing risperidone to pimozide,
risperidone showed superiority in reducing comorbid obsessive-compulsive
symptoms as well as reducing tics. In other randomized clinical trials,
risperidone reduced tics in children, adolescents, and adults with mean daily
doses of 2.5 mg with a range of 1 to 6 mg.
Haloperidol and pimozide are the two most well-investigated and FDAapproved antipsychotic agents in the treatment of Tourette disorder.
However, atypical antipsychotics such as risperidone are often first-line
agents due to their safer side-effect profiles. Both haloperidol and pimozide
are efficacious in multiple randomized clinical trials in the treatment of
Tourette disorder. Both haloperidol and pimozide present significant risks for
extrapyramidal side effects; in a long-term naturalistic follow-up study,
haloperidol produces more significant acute dyskinesia and dystonia
compared to pimozide.
A third typical antipsychotic, fluphenazine, has been used in the United
States for many years in the treatment of tic disorders in the absence of robust
data supporting its efficacy. A small controlled study of fluphenazine,
trifluphenazine, and haloperidol found similar reductions in tics; however,
haloperidol has more extrapyramidal side effects and more sedation. The
frequency of sedation, dystonia, and akathisia of typical antipsychotics,
probably due to their predominant dopaminergic blockade in the nigrostriatal
pathways, limits their use and increases the appeal of the atypical
antipsychotics. Risperidone and pimozide had equal efficacy in one study of
children, adolescents, and adults with Tourette disorder.
Aripiprazole has become a pharmacologic agent of interest in the treatment
of tic disorders due to its mode of action; in addition to its D2 receptor
antagonistic actions, aripiprazole is also a partial D2 and 5-HT1A receptor




<<<PAGE 742>>>

in the room, such as a friend or relative, may help. Familiar pictures and
decorations; the presence of a clock or a calendar; and regular orientations to
person, place, and time help make patients with delirium comfortable.
Delirium can sometimes occur in older patients wearing eye patches after
cataract surgery (“black-patch delirium”). Such patients can be helped by
placing pinholes in the patches to let in some stimuli or by occasionally
removing one patch at a time during recovery.
Pharmacotherapy
The three significant delirium symptoms that may require pharmacologic
treatment are psychosis, agitation, and insomnia. A commonly used drug for
psychosis is haloperidol. Depending on a patient’s age, weight, and physical
condition, the initial dose may range from 2 to 5 mg intramuscularly,
repeated in an hour if the patient remains agitated. As soon as the patient is
calm, oral medication in liquid concentrate or tablet form should begin. Two
daily oral doses should suffice, mostly at bedtime. The oral equivalent is
about 1.5 times the parenteral dose. The effective total daily dose of
haloperidol may range from 5 to 40 mg for most patients with delirium.
Haloperidol may cause a prolonged QT interval. Clinicians should evaluate
baseline and periodic electrocardiograms as well as monitor the cardiac status
of the patient. Droperidol is a butyrophenone available as an alternative
intravenous (IV) formulation, although careful monitoring of the
electrocardiogram may be prudent with this treatment. The U.S. Food and
Drug Administration (FDA) issued a Black Box Warning because of cases of
patients with QT prolongation and torsades de pointes receiving droperidol.
Because of its potential for serious proarrhythmic effects and death, it should
be used only in patients who do not respond well to other treatments.
Phenothiazines should be avoided in delirious patients because these drugs
are associated with significant anticholinergic activity.
Table 3-6
Physical Examination of the Delirious Patient
Parameter

Finding

Clinical Implication

1. Pulse

Bradycardia

Hypothyroidism




<<<PAGE 749>>>

medical
illnesses
Most likely
associated
illnesses

Metabolic,
toxic, or
infectious
illnesses

Neurodegenerative or vascular
disorders

Terminally Ill Patients. When delirium occurs in the context of a terminal
illness, issues about advanced directives and the existence of a health care
proxy become more significant. This scenario emphasizes the importance of
early development of advance directives for health care decision making
while a person can communicate the wishes regarding the extent of
aggressive diagnostic tests at life’s end. The focus may change from an
aggressive search for the etiology of the delirium to one of palliation,
comfort, and assistance with dying.
Table 3-9
Pharmacologic Treatment of Delirium
Pharmacologic
Agent

Dosage

Side Effects

Comments

Typical
Antipsychotics
Haloperidol

Atypical
Antipsychotics

0.5–1 mg
Extrapyramidal
p.o. twice
side (EPS)
a day
effects
(may be Prolonged QTc
given
every 4–
6 hr as
needed,
too)
All can prolong
QTc duration

Most commonly
used
Can be given
intramuscularly




<<<PAGE 1681>>>

problem
No obvious nonpharmacologic
precipitant
Dissipates with drug
discontinuation
Antipsychotic drugs and
ejaculatory problems

Perphenazine
Chlorpromazine
Trifluoperazine
Haloperidol
Mesoridazine
Chlorprothixene

Antipsychotic drugs and priapism

Perphenazine
Mesoridazine
Chlorpromazine
Thioridazine
Fluphenazine
Molindone
Risperidone
Clozapine

Table by R. T. Seagraves, M.D.

Because depression is associated with decreased libido, varying levels of
sexual dysfunction and anhedonia are part of the disease process. Some
patients report improved sexual functioning as their depression improves
because of antidepressant medication. The phenomenon makes evaluating
sexual side effects difficult; also, the side effects may disappear with time,
perhaps because a biogenic amine homeostatic mechanism comes into play.




<<<PAGE 1909>>>

the patient’s consent, relatives and other clinicians should be instructed about
the reasons for the drug treatment, as well as the expected benefits and
potential risks.

DOSING, DURATION, AND MONITORING
Dosing
The clinically effective dose for treatment depends on the characteristics of
the drug and patient factors, such as inherited sensitivity and ability to
metabolize a drug, concurrent medical disorders, use of concurrent
medications, and history of exposure to previous medications.
Plasma concentrations of many psychotropics can vary up to 10-fold.
Thus, to some extent, the optimal dose for an individual is ultimately
determined by trial and error, guided by the empirical evidence of the usual
dose range for that drug. In some cases, it may prove helpful to test patients
for genetic polymorphisms involving hepatic enzymes. Patients who are
ultrarapid metabolizers of certain drugs may require higher than standard
dosing. Slow metabolizers might demonstrate side effects and even toxicity at
very low doses.
Some drugs demonstrate a clear relationship between increases in the dose
and clinical response. This dose–response curve plots the drug concentration
against the effects of the drug.
The potency of a drug refers to the relative dose required to achieve
specific effects, not to its efficacy. Haloperidol, for example, is more potent
than chlorpromazine (Thorazine) because approximately 5 mg of haloperidol
is required to achieve the same therapeutic effect as 100 mg of
chlorpromazine. These drugs, however, are equal in their clinical efficacy—
that is, the maximal clinical response achievable by the administration of a
drug.
Drugs must be used in effective dosages for sufficient periods. Although
drug tolerability and safety are always considerations, subtherapeutic doses
and incomplete therapeutic trials should be avoided. The use of inadequate
doses merely exposes the patient to the risk of side effects without providing
the probability of therapeutic benefit. Because of the wide margin of safety
associated with most currently prescribed medications, more risk exists in




<<<PAGE 1931>>>

combination of risperidone with lithium or valproate is indicated for the
short-term treatment of acute manic or mixed episodes associated with
bipolar I disorder.
Risperidone is also indicated for the treatment of irritability associated with
an autistic spectrum disorder in children and adolescents ages 5 to 16 years,
including symptoms of aggression toward others, deliberate selfinjuriousness, temper tantrums, and quickly changing moods.
Pharmacology. Risperidone is a benzisoxazole. It undergoes extensive
first-pass hepatic metabolism to 9-hydroxy risperidone, a metabolite with
equivalent antipsychotic activity. Peak plasma levels of the parent compound
occur within 1 hour for the parent compound and 3 hours for the metabolite.
Risperidone has bioactivity of 70 percent. The combined half-life of
risperidone and 9-hydroxy risperidone averages 20 hours, so it is useful in
once-daily dosing. Risperidone is an antagonist of the serotonin 5-HT2A,
dopamine D2, α1-adrenergic and α2-adrenergic, and histamine H1 receptors. It
has a low affinity for α-adrenergic and muscarinic cholinergic receptors.
Risperidone is a potent antagonist of D2 receptors, as potent as haloperidol,
however unlike haloperidol it causes less EPS.
Dosages. The recommended dose range and frequency of risperidone
dosing have changed since the drug first came into clinical use. Risperidone
is available in 0.25-, 0.5-, 1-, 2-, 3-, and 4-mg tablets and a 1-mg/mL oral
solution. The initial dosage is usually 1 to 2 mg at night, which can then be
increased to 4 mg/day. Positron emission tomography (PET) studies have
shown that dosages of 1 to 4 mg/day provide the required D2 blockade for a
therapeutic effect. At first, it was believed that because of its short
elimination half-life, risperidone should be given twice a day, but studies
have shown equal efficacy with once-a-day dosing. Dosages above 6 mg a
day are associated with a higher incidence of adverse effects, particularly
EPS. There is no correlation between plasma concentrations and therapeutic
effects. Dosing guidelines for adolescents and children are different from
those for adults, requiring lower starting dosages; higher dosages are
associated with more adverse effects.




<<<PAGE 1939>>>

Side Effects. Somnolence, headache, dizziness, nausea, and
lightheadedness are the most common adverse effects in patients taking
ziprasidone. The drug has almost no significant effects outside the CNS, is
associated with almost no weight gain, and does not cause sustained prolactin
elevation. Concerns about prolongation of the QTc complex have deterred
some clinicians from using ziprasidone as a first choice. The QTc interval has
been shown to increase in patients treated with 40 and 120 mg/day.
Ziprasidone is contraindicated in combination with other drugs known to
prolong the QTc interval. These include, but are not limited to, dofetilide,
sotalol, quinidine, other class IA and III antiarrhythmics, mesoridazine,
thioridazine,
chlorpromazine,
droperidol,
pimozide,
sparfloxacin,
gatifloxacin, moxifloxacin, halofantrine, mefloquine, pentamidine, arsenic
trioxide, levomethadyl acetate, dolasetron mesylate, probucol, and
tacrolimus. Ziprasidone should be avoided in patients with congenital long
QT syndrome and patients with a history of cardiac arrhythmias.
Aripiprazole (Abilify)
Aripiprazole is a potent 5-HT2A antagonist and is indicated for the treatment
of both schizophrenia and acute mania. It is also approved for the
augmentation of antidepressant agents in MDD. Aripiprazole is a D2
antagonist, but can also act as a partial D2 agonist. Partial D2 agonists
compete at D2 receptors for endogenous dopamine, thereby producing a
functional reduction of dopamine activity.
Indications. Aripiprazole is indicated for the treatment of schizophrenia.
Short-term, 4- to 6-week studies comparing aripiprazole with haloperidol and
risperidone in patients with schizophrenia and schizoaffective disorder have
shown comparable efficacy. Dosages of 15, 20, and 30 mg a day were found
to be effective. Long-term studies suggest that aripiprazole is effective as a
maintenance treatment at a daily dose of 15 to 30 mg.
Aripiprazole is also indicated for the acute and maintenance treatment of
manic and mixed episodes associated with bipolar I disorder. It is also used
as adjunctive therapy to either lithium or valproate for the acute treatment of
manic and mixed episodes associated with bipolar I disorder.
Aripiprazole is indicated for use as adjunctive therapy to antidepressants




<<<PAGE 1943>>>

clozapine is discontinued. This suppression is true even though clozapine, on
rare occasions, may cause tardive dyskinesia. Other clinical situations in
which clozapine may be used include the treatment of psychotic patients
intolerant of EPS caused by other agents, treatment-resistant mania, severe
psychotic depression, idiopathic Parkinson disease, Huntington disease, and
suicidal patients with schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorder. Other
treatment-resistant disorders that have demonstrated response to clozapine
include pervasive developmental disorder, autism of childhood, and OCD
(either alone or in combination with an SSRI). Used by itself, clozapine may
very rarely induce obsessive-compulsive symptoms.
Pharmacology. Clozapine is a dibenzothiazepine. It is rapidly absorbed,
with peak plasma levels reached in about 2 hours. Steady state is achieved in
less than 1 week if twice-daily dosing is used. The elimination half-life is
about 12 hours. Clozapine has two significant metabolites, one of which, Ndimethyl clozapine, may have some pharmacologic activities. Clozapine is an
antagonist of 5-HT2A, D1, D3, D4, and α (especially α1) receptors. It has
relatively low potency as a D2 receptor antagonist. Data from PET scanning
show that whereas 10 mg of haloperidol produces 80 percent occupancy of
striatal D2 receptors, clinically significant dosages of clozapine occupy only
40 to 50 percent of striatal D2 receptors. This difference in D2 receptor
occupancy is probably why clozapine does not cause EPS. It has also been
postulated that clozapine and other SDAs bind more loosely to the D2
receptor, and because of this “fast dissociation,” more normal dopamine
neurotransmission is possible.
Dosages. Clozapine is available in 25- and 100-mg tablets. The initial
dosage is usually 25 mg one or two times daily, although a conservative
initial dosage is 12.5 mg twice daily. The dosage can then be increased
gradually (25 mg a day every 2 or 3 days) to 300 mg a day in divided doses,
usually two or three times a day. Dosages up to 900 mg a day can be used.
Testing for blood concentrations of clozapine may be helpful in patients who
fail to respond. Studies have found that plasma concentrations greater than
350 µg/mL are associated with a better likelihood of response.




<<<PAGE 1955>>>

Severe Agitation and Violent Behavior. Severely agitated and violent
patients, regardless of diagnosis, may be treated with DRAs. Symptoms such
as extreme irritability, lack of impulse control, severe hostility, gross
hyperactivity, and agitation respond to short-term treatment with these drugs.
Children with mental disabilities, especially those with profound intellectual
disabilities and autistic disorder, often have associated episodes of violence,
aggression, and agitation that respond to treatment with antipsychotic drugs;
however, the repeated administration of antipsychotics to control disruptive
behavior in children is controversial.
Tourette Disorder. DRAs are used to treat Tourette’s disorder, a
neurobehavioral disorder marked by motor and vocal tics. Haloperidol and
pimozide (Orap) are the drugs most frequently used, but other DRAs are also
useful. Some clinicians prefer to use clonidine (Catapres) for this disorder
because of its lower risk of neurologic side effects.
Borderline Personality Disorder. Patients with borderline personality
disorder who experience transient psychotic symptoms, such as perceptual
disturbances, suspiciousness, ideas of reference, and aggression, may need to
be treated with a DRA. This disorder is also associated with mood instability,
so patients should be evaluated for possible treatment with mood-stabilizing
agents.
Dementia and Delirium. About two-thirds of agitated, elderly patients
with various forms of dementia improve when given a DRA. Low doses of
high-potency drugs (e.g., 0.5 to 1 mg a day of haloperidol) are recommended.
DRAs are also used to treat psychotic symptoms and agitation associated
with delirium. The cause of the delirium needs to be determined because
toxic deliriums caused by anticholinergic agents can be exacerbated by lowpotency DRAs, which often have significant antimuscarinic activity.
Orthostasis, parkinsonism, and worsened cognition are the most problematic
side effects in this elderly population.
Substance-Induced Psychotic Disorder. Intoxication with cocaine,
amphetamines, alcohol, phencyclidine, or other drugs can cause psychotic
symptoms. Because these symptoms tend to be time-limited, it is preferable




<<<PAGE 1959>>>

intravenous (IV) infusion, repeated within 1 hour as necessary. Too much
physostigmine is dangerous, and symptoms of physostigmine toxicity include
hypersalivation and sweating. Atropine sulfate (0.5 mg) can reverse the
effects of physostigmine toxicity.
Cardiac Effects. The DRAs decrease cardiac contractility, disrupt enzyme
contractility in cardiac cells, increase circulating levels of catecholamines,
and prolong atrial and ventricular conduction time and refractory periods.
Low-potency DRAs, particularly the phenothiazines, are usually more
cardiotoxic than are high-potency drugs. One exception is haloperidol, which
has been linked to abnormal heart rhythm, ventricular arrhythmias, torsades
de pointes, and sudden death when injected IV. Pimozide, sulpiride, and
droperidol (a butyrophenone) also prolong the QTc interval and have been
associated with torsades de pointes and sudden death. In one study,
thioridazine was responsible for 28 (61 percent) of the 46 sudden
antipsychotic deaths. In 15 of these cases, it was the only drug ingested.
Chlorpromazine also causes prolongation of the QT and PR intervals,
blunting of the T waves, and depression of the ST segment. These drugs are
thus indicated only when other agents have been ineffective.
Sudden Death. Occasional reports of sudden cardiac death during
treatment with DRAs may be the result of cardiac arrhythmias. Other causes
may include seizure, asphyxiation, malignant hyperthermia, heatstroke, and
neuroleptic malignant syndrome. However, there does seem to be an overall
increased incidence of sudden death with antipsychotics.
Orthostatic (Postural) Hypotension. Orthostatic (postural) hypotension
is most frequent with low-potency drugs, particularly chlorpromazine,
thioridazine, and chlorprothixene. When using intramuscular (IM) lowpotency DRAs, the clinician should measure the patient’s BP (lying and
standing) before and after the first dose and during the first few days of
treatment.
Orthostatic hypotension is mediated by adrenergic blockade and occurs
most frequently during the first few days of treatment. Tolerance often
develops for this side effect, which is why the initial dosing of these drugs is
lower than the usual therapeutic dose. Fainting or falls, although uncommon,




<<<PAGE 1962>>>

progress to such colors as slate gray, metallic blue, and purple. These
discolorations resolve when the patient is switched to another medication.
Irreversible retinal pigmentation is associated with the use of thioridazine
at dosages above 1,000 mg a day. An early symptom of the side effect can
sometimes be nocturnal confusion related to difficulty with night vision. The
pigmentation can progress even after thioridazine administration is stopped,
finally resulting in blindness. It is for this reason that the maximum
recommended dosage of thioridazine is 800 mg/day.
Patients taking chlorpromazine may develop a relatively benign
pigmentation of the eyes, characterized by whitish brown granular deposits
concentrated in the anterior lens and posterior cornea and visible only by slitlens examination. The deposits can progress to opaque white and yellowbrown granules, often stellate. Occasionally, the conjunctiva is discolored by
a brown pigment. No retinal damage is seen, and vision is rarely impaired.
This condition gradually resolves when chlorpromazine is discontinued.
Jaundice. Elevations of liver enzymes during treatment with a DRA tend to
be transient and not clinically significant. When chlorpromazine first came
into use, cases of obstructive or cholestatic jaundice were reported, usually in
the first month of treatment and heralded by symptoms of upper abdominal
pain, nausea, and vomiting. This adverse effect was followed by fever, rash,
eosinophilia, bilirubin in the urine, and increases in levels of serum bilirubin,
alkaline phosphatase, and hepatic transaminases. Reported cases are now
sporadic, but if jaundice occurs, the medication should be discontinued.
Overdoses. Overdoses typically consist of exaggerated DRA side effects.
Symptoms and signs include CNS depression, EPS, mydriasis, rigidity,
restlessness, decreased deep tendon reflexes, tachycardia, and hypotension.
The severe symptoms of overdose include delirium, coma, respiratory
depression, and seizures. Haloperidol may be among the safest typical
antipsychotics in overdose. After an overdose, electroencephalography (EEG)
shows diffuse slowing and low voltage. An extreme overdose may lead to
delirium and coma, with respiratory depression and hypotension. Lifethreatening overdose usually involves the ingestion of other CNS
depressants, such as alcohol or benzodiazepines.
Activated charcoal, if possible, and gastric lavage should be administered




<<<PAGE 1968>>>

phenylketonuria.
Dosage and Clinical Guidelines
Contraindications to the use of DRAs include the following: (1) a history of a
severe allergic response; (2) the possible ingestion of a substance that will
interact with the antipsychotic to induce CNS depression (e.g., alcohol,
opioids, barbiturates, and benzodiazepines) or anticholinergic delirium (e.g.,
scopolamine and possibly phencyclidine [PCP]); (3) the presence of a severe
cardiac abnormality; (4) a high risk for seizures; (5) the presence of narrowangle glaucoma or prostatic hypertrophy if a drug with high anticholinergic
activity is to be used; and (6) the presence or a history of tardive dyskinesia.
Antipsychotics should be administered with caution in persons with hepatic
disease because impaired hepatic metabolism may result in high plasma
concentrations. The usual assessment should include a CBC with WBC
indexes, liver function tests, and electrocardiography (ECG), especially in
women older than 40 years of age and men older than 30 years of age.
Elderly persons and children are more sensitive to side effects than are young
adults, so the dosage of the drug should be adjusted accordingly.
Various patients may respond to widely different dosages of
antipsychotics; therefore, there is no set dosage for any given antipsychotic
drug. Because of side effects, it is a reasonable clinical practice to begin at a
low dosage and increase as necessary. It is important to remember that the
maximal effects of a particular dosage may not be evident for 4 to 6 weeks.
Available preparations and dosages of the DRAs are given in Table 21-14.
Short-Term Treatment. The equivalent of 5 to 20 mg of haloperidol is a
reasonable dose for an adult in an acute state. An older adult may benefit
from as little as 1 mg of haloperidol. The administration of more than 25 mg
of chlorpromazine in one injection may result in profound hypotension. IM
administration results in peak plasma levels in about 30 minutes versus 90
minutes using the oral route. Doses of drugs for IM administration are about
half those given by the oral route. In a short-term treatment setting, the
person should be observed for 1 hour after the first dose of medication. After
that time, most clinicians administer a second dose or a sedative agent (e.g., a
benzodiazepine) to achieve effective behavioral control. Possible sedatives




<<<PAGE 1969>>>

include lorazepam (Ativan) (2 mg IM) and amobarbital (50 to 250 mg IM).
Rapid Neuroleptization. Rapid neuroleptization (also called
psychotolysis) is the practice of administering hourly IM doses of
antipsychotic medications until marked sedation is achieved. However,
several research studies have shown that merely waiting several more hours
after one dose yields the same clinical improvement as is seen with repeated
doses. Nevertheless, clinicians must be careful to keep patients from
becoming violent while they are psychotic. Clinicians can help prevent
violent episodes by using adjuvant sedatives or by temporarily using physical
restraints until the persons can control their behavior.
Early Treatment. A full 6 weeks may be necessary to evaluate the extent of
the improvement in psychotic symptoms. However, agitation and excitement
usually improve quickly with antipsychotic treatment. About 75 percent of
persons with a short history of illness show significant improvement in their
psychosis. Psychotic symptoms, both positive and negative, usually continue
to improve 3 to 12 months after the initiation of treatment.
About 5 mg of haloperidol or 300 mg of chlorpromazine is a usual
effective daily dose. In the past, much higher doses were used, but evidence
suggests that it resulted in more side effects without additional benefits. A
single daily dose is usually given at bedtime to help induce sleep and to
reduce the incidence of adverse effects. However, bedtime dosing for elderly
persons may increase their risk of falling if they get out of bed during the
night. The sedative effects of typical antipsychotics last only a few hours, in
contrast to the antipsychotic effects, which last for 1 to 3 days.
Intermittent Medications. It is a common clinical practice to order
medications to be given intermittently as needed (PRN). Although this
practice may be reasonable during the first few days that a person is
hospitalized, the amount of time the person takes antipsychotic drugs, rather
than an increase in dosage, is what produces therapeutic improvement.
Clinicians on inpatient services may feel pressured by staff members to write
PRN antipsychotic orders; such orders should include specific symptoms,
how often the drugs should be given, and how many doses can be given each
day. Clinicians may choose to use small doses for the PRN doses (e.g., 2 mg




<<<PAGE 1971>>>

patients and take into account their wishes, the severity of their illnesses, and
the quality of their support systems. The clinician needs to know enough
about the patient’s life to try to predict upcoming stressors that might require
increasing the dosage or closely monitoring compliance.
Long-Acting Depot Medications. Long-acting depot preparations may
be needed to overcome problems with compliance. IM preparations are
typically given once every 1 to 4 weeks.
Two depot preparations, a decanoate and an enanthate of fluphenazine, and
a decanoate preparation of haloperidol, are available in the United States. The
preparations are injected IM into an area of extensive muscle tissue, from
which they are absorbed slowly into the blood. Decanoate preparations can
be given less frequently than enanthate preparations because they are
absorbed more slowly. Although stabilizing a person on the oral preparation
of the specific drugs is not necessary before initiating the depot form, it is
good practice to give at least one oral dose of the drug to assess the
possibility of an adverse effect, such as severe EPS or an allergic reaction.
It is reasonable to begin with either 12.5 mg (0.5 mL) of fluphenazine
preparation or 25 mg (0.5 mL) of haloperidol decanoate. If symptoms emerge
in the next 2 to 4 weeks, the person can be treated temporarily with additional
oral medications or with additional small depot injections. After 3 to 4 weeks,
the depot injection can be increased to a single dose equal to the total of the
doses given during the initial period.
A good reason to initiate depot treatment with low doses is that the
absorption of the preparations may be faster than usual at the onset of
treatment, resulting in frightening episodes of dystonia that eventually
discourage compliance with the medication. Some clinicians keep patients
drug free for 3 to 7 days before initiating depot treatment and give small
doses of the depot preparations (3.125 mg of fluphenazine or 6.25 mg of
haloperidol) every few days to avoid those initial problems.
Plasma Concentrations
Genetic differences among persons and pharmacokinetic interactions with
other drugs influence the metabolism of the antipsychotics. If a person has
not improved after 4 to 6 weeks of treatment, the plasma concentration of the




<<<PAGE 2018>>>

is necessary for persons with renal disease.
Drug Interactions and Laboratory Interferences. Nefazodone should
not be given concomitantly with MAOIs. Also, nefazodone has particular
drug–drug interactions with the triazolobenzodiazepines triazolam (Halcion)
and alprazolam (Xanax) because of the inhibition of CYP3A4 by nefazodone.
Potentially elevated levels of each of these drugs can develop after
administration of nefazodone, but the levels of nefazodone are generally not
affected. The dose of triazolam should be lowered by 75 percent, and the
dose of alprazolam should be lowered by 50 percent, when given
concomitantly with nefazodone.
Nefazodone may slow the metabolism of digoxin; therefore, digoxin levels
should be monitored carefully in persons taking both medications.
Nefazodone also slows the metabolism of haloperidol (Haldol) so that the
dosage of haloperidol should be reduced in persons taking both medications.
The addition of nefazodone may also exacerbate the adverse effects of
lithium carbonate (Eskalith).
There are no known laboratory interferences associated with nefazodone.
Dosage and Clinical Guidelines. Nefazodone is available in 50-, 200-,
and 250-mg unscored tablets and 100- and 150-mg scored tablets. The
recommended starting dosage of nefazodone is 100 mg twice a day, but 50
mg twice a day may be better tolerated, especially by elderly persons. The
dosage should be slowly raised in increments of 100 to 200 mg a day at
intervals of no less than 1 week per increase to limit the development of
adverse effects. The optimal dosage is 300 to 600 mg daily in two divided
doses. However, some studies report that nefazodone is effective when taken
once a day, especially at bedtime. Geriatric persons should receive dosages
about two-thirds of the usual nongeriatric dosages, with a maximum of 400
mg a day. Similar to other antidepressants, the clinical benefit of nefazodone
usually appears after 2 to 4 weeks of treatment. Patients with the
premenstrual syndrome are treated with a flexible dosage that averages about
250 mg a day.
Trazodone




<<<PAGE 2091>>>

Cyclosporine
Desipramine
Dicumarol
Doxepin
Doxycycline
Ethosuximide
Felbamate
Fentanyl
Fluphenazine
Haloperidol
Hormonal contraceptives
Imipramine
Lamotrigine
Methadone
Methsuximide
Methylprednisolone
Nimodipine
Pancuronium
Phensuximide
Phenytoin
Primidone
Theophylline
Valproate
Warfarin
Carbamazepine may increase drug
plasma concentrations of
Clomipramine
Phenytoin
Primidone

Fluoxetine
Fluvoxamine
Gemfibrozil
Itraconazole
Ketoconazole
Isoniazida
Itraconazole
Lamotrigine
Loratadine
Macrolides
Nefazodone
Nicotinamide
Propoxyphene
Terfenadine
Troleandomycin
Valproatea
Verapamil
Viloxazine
Drugs that may decrease
carbamazepine plasma
concentrations
Carbamazepine
(autoinduction)
Cisplatin
Doxorubicin HCl
Felbamate
Phenobarbital
Phenytoin
Primidone
Rifampinb
Theophylline
Valproate

aIncreased concentrations of the active 10,11-epoxide.
bDecreased concentrations of carbamazepine and increased concentrations of the 10,11-

epoxide.
Table by Carlos A. Zarate, Jr., M.D. and Mauricio Tohen, M.D.




<<<PAGE 2126>>>

with hepatic and renal impairment, pregnant women, and nursing mothers.
Buspirone can be used safely by the elderly.
Drug Interactions
The coadministration of buspirone and haloperidol (Haldol) results in
increased blood concentrations of haloperidol. Buspirone should not be used
with MAOIs to avoid hypertensive episodes, and a 2-week washout period
should pass between the discontinuation of MAOI use and the initiation of
treatment with buspirone. Drugs or foods that inhibit CYP3A4, for example,
erythromycin, itraconazole (Sporanox), nefazodone (Serzone), and grapefruit
juice, increase buspirone plasma concentrations.
Laboratory Interferences
Single doses of buspirone can cause transient elevations in growth hormone,
prolactin, and cortisol concentrations, although the effects are not clinically
significant.
Dosage and Clinical Guidelines
Buspirone is available in single-scored 5- and 10-mg tablets and triple-scored
15- and 30-mg tablets; treatment is usually initiated with either 5 mg orally
three times daily or 7.5 mg orally twice daily. The dosage can be raised 5 mg
every 2 to 4 days to the usual dosage range of 15 to 60 mg a day.
Buspirone should not be used in patients with past hypersensitivity to
buspirone, in cases of diabetes-associated metabolic acidosis, or patients with
severely compromised liver or renal function.
Switching from a Benzodiazepine to Buspirone. Buspirone is not
cross-tolerant with benzodiazepines, barbiturates, or alcohol. A common
clinical problem, therefore, is how to initiate buspirone therapy in a person
who is currently taking benzodiazepines. There are two alternatives. First, the
clinician can start buspirone treatment gradually while the benzodiazepine is
being withdrawn. Second, the clinician can start buspirone treatment and
bring the person up to a therapeutic dosage for 2 to 3 weeks while the person
is still receiving the regular dosage of the benzodiazepine and then slowly
taper the benzodiazepine dosage. Patients who have received




<<<PAGE 2190>>>

Therapeutic Indications
There is considerably more experience in clinical psychiatry with clonidine
than with guanfacine. There is recent interest in the use of guanfacine for the
same indications that respond to clonidine due to guanfacine’s longer halflife and relative lack of sedative effects.
Withdrawal from Opioids, Alcohol, Benzodiazepines, or Nicotine.
Clonidine and guanfacine are effective in reducing the autonomic symptoms
of rapid opioid withdrawal (e.g., hypertension, tachycardia, dilated pupils,
sweating, lacrimation, and rhinorrhea) but not the associated subjective
sensations. Clonidine administration (0.1 to 0.2 mg two to four times a day)
is initiated before detoxification and is then tapered off over 1 to 2 weeks
(Table 21-55).
Clonidine and guanfacine can reduce symptoms of alcohol and
benzodiazepine withdrawal, including anxiety, diarrhea, and tachycardia.
They can reduce craving, anxiety, and irritability symptoms of nicotine
withdrawal. The transdermal patch formulation of clonidine is associated
with better long-term compliance for purposes of detoxification than is the
tablet formulation.
Tourette Disorder. Clonidine and guanfacine are effective drugs for the
treatment of Tourette disorder. Most clinicians begin treatment for Tourette
disorder with the standard DRAs haloperidol (Haldol) and pimozide (Orap)
and the SDAs risperidone (Risperdal) and olanzapine (Zyprexa). However, if
concerned about the adverse effects of these drugs, the clinician may begin
treatment with clonidine or guanfacine. The starting dose of clonidine for
children is 0.05 mg a day; it can be increased to 0.3 mg a day in divided
doses. Clonidine may take long periods (e.g., 4 to 6 months) to positively
effect the symptoms of the disorder. The response rate has been reported to
be up to 70 percent.
Table 21-54
α2-Adrenergic Receptor Agonists Used in Psychiatrya




<<<PAGE 2212>>>

Therapeutic Indications. The primary indication for the use of
anticholinergics in psychiatric practice is for the treatment of neurolepticinduced parkinsonism, characterized by tremor, rigidity, cogwheeling,
bradykinesia, sialorrhea, stooped posture, and festination. All of the available
anticholinergics are equally effective in the treatment of parkinsonian
symptoms. Neuroleptic-induced parkinsonism is most common in elderly
persons and is most frequently seen with high-potency DRAs, for example,
haloperidol (Haldol). The onset of symptoms usually occurs after 2 or 3
weeks of treatment. The incidence of neuroleptic-induced parkinsonism is
lower with the newer antipsychotic drugs of the SDA class.
Another indication for the use of anticholinergics is for the treatment of
neuroleptic-induced acute dystonia, which is most common in young men.
The syndrome often occurs early in the course of treatment; it is commonly
associated with high-potency DRAs (e.g., haloperidol); and most commonly
affects the muscles of the neck, tongue, face, and back. Anticholinergic drugs
are useful both in the short-term treatment of dystonias and in prophylaxis
against neuroleptic-induced acute dystonias.
Akathisia is characterized by a subjective and objective sense of
restlessness, anxiety, and agitation. Although a trial of anticholinergics for
the treatment of neuroleptic-induced acute akathisia is reasonable, these drugs
are not generally considered as effective as the β-adrenergic receptor
antagonists, the benzodiazepines, and clonidine (Catapres).
Precautions and Adverse Reactions. The adverse effects of the
anticholinergic drugs result from the blockade of muscarinic acetylcholine
receptors. Anticholinergic drugs should be used cautiously, if at all, by
persons with prostatic hypertrophy, urinary retention, and narrow-angle
glaucoma. The anticholinergics are occasionally used as drugs of abuse




<<<PAGE 2560>>>

in time, they reach their understanding.
In an emergency, as in any other psychiatric situation, when a clinician
does not know what to say, the best approach is to listen. Persons in crisis
reveal how much they need support, denial, ventilation, and words to
conceptualize the meaning of their crisis and to discover paths to resolution.
Pharmacotherapy
The primary indications for the use of psychotropic medication in an
emergency room include violent or assaultive behavior, massive anxiety or
panic, and extrapyramidal reactions, such as dystonia and akathisia as
adverse effects of psychiatric drugs. Laryngospasm is a rare form of dystonia,
and psychiatrists should be prepared to maintain an open airway with
intubation if necessary.
Persons who are delusional or in a state of catatonic excitement require
tranquilization. Episodic outbursts of violence may respond to antipsychotics
(haloperidol, second-generation antipsychotics), benzodiazepines and
antihistamines. If history suggests a seizure disorder, use clinical studies to
confirm the diagnosis and evaluation to ascertain the cause. If the findings are
positive, anticonvulsant therapy is initiated, or appropriate surgery is
provided (e.g., in the case of a cerebral mass). Conservative measures may
suffice for intoxication from drugs of abuse. Sometimes, drugs such as
haloperidol (5 to 10 mg every half-hour to an hour) are needed until a patient
is stabilized. Benzodiazepines may be used instead of, or in addition to,
antipsychotics (to reduce the antipsychotic dosage). When a recreational drug
has strong anticholinergic properties, benzodiazepines are more appropriate
than antipsychotics.
Violent, struggling patients are subdued most effectively with an
appropriate sedative or antipsychotic. Diazepam (5 to 10 mg) or lorazepam (2
to 4 mg) may be given slowly intravenously (IV) over 2 minutes. Clinicians
must give IV medication with great care to avoid respiratory arrest. Patients
who require IM medication can be sedated with haloperidol (5 to 10 mg IM).
If the furor is caused by alcohol or is part of a postseizure psychomotor
disturbance, the sleep produced by a relatively small amount of an IV
medication may go on for hours. On awakening, patients are often entirely
alert and rational and typically have complete amnesia about the violent


