<<<PAGE 84>>>

difficulty in inspiration experienced by patients with depression and on the
difficulty in expiration experienced by patients with pulmonary disease.
Bronchial asthma has sometimes been associated with a childhood history of
extreme dependence on the mother. Patients with bronchospasm should not
receive propranolol (Inderal) because it can block catecholamine-induced
bronchodilation; propranolol is specifically contraindicated for patients with
bronchial asthma because epinephrine given to such patients in an emergency
will not be effective. Patients taking angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE)
inhibitors can develop a dry cough as an adverse effect of the drug.
Cardiovascular System. Tachycardia, palpitations, and cardiac
arrhythmia are among the most common signs of anxiety about which the
patient may complain. Pheochromocytoma usually produces symptoms that
mimic anxiety disorders, such as rapid heartbeat, tremors, and pallor.
Increased urinary catecholamines are diagnostic of pheochromocytoma.
Patients taking guanethidine (Ismelin) for hypertension should not receive
tricyclic drugs, which reduce or eliminate the antihypertensive effect of
guanethidine. A history of hypertension can preclude the use of MAOIs
because of the risk of a hypertensive crisis if such patients with hypertension
inadvertently ingest foods high in tyramine. Patients with suspected cardiac
disease should have an electrocardiogram before tricyclics or lithium
(Eskalith) is prescribed. A history of substernal pain should be evaluated, and
the clinician should keep in mind that psychological stress can precipitate
angina-type chest pain in the presence of normal coronary arteries. Patients
taking opioids should never receive MAOIs; the combination can cause
cardiovascular collapse.
Gastrointestinal System. Such topics as appetite, distress before or after
meals, food preferences, diarrhea, vomiting, constipation, laxative use, and
abdominal pain relate to the gastrointestinal system. A history of weight loss
is common in depressive disorders, but depression can accompany the weight
loss caused by ulcerative colitis, regional enteritis, and cancer. Atypical
depression is accompanied by hyperphagia and weight gain. Anorexia
nervosa is accompanied by severe weight loss in the presence of normal
appetite. Avoidance of certain foods may be a phobic phenomenon or part of
an obsessive ritual. Laxative abuse and induced vomiting are common in




<<<PAGE 552>>>

controlled study of sertraline to prevent PTSD found that children who
received sertraline, flexibly dosed between 25 and 150 mg/day, had a
decrease in parent-reported symptoms of PTSD over 8 weeks compared to a
placebo group. Among the child-reported symptoms, however, there was no
significant difference between the two groups.
Psychiatrists sometimes use antiadrenergic agents to treat dysregulation of
the noradrenergic system in adults and youth with PTSD. α2-Agonists such as
clonidine and guanfacine, for example, have been used to decrease
norepinephrine release, whereas centrally acting β-antagonists such as
propranolol, and α1-antagonists such as prazosin, are hypothesized to
improve hyperarousal and intrusive thoughts through attenuation of
norepinephrine postsynaptically. Although there are some data in adults with
PTSD to support the use of these agents, there are mainly case reports for
youths. There is a suggestion that guanfacine may reduce nightmares in
children with PTSD and that clonidine may diminish symptoms of
reenactment of traumatic events in children. One report of propranolol
treatment in 11 pediatric patients with PTSD from sexual or physical abuse
with a mean age of 8.5 years, who exhibited agitation and hyperarousal,
indicated some decrease in symptoms in 8 of the 11 children studied. Another
open study of transdermal clonidine treatment of preschoolers with PTSD
suggests that clonidine may be efficacious in this population in decreasing
activation and hyperarousal. An additional open trial of oral clonidine with
dosage ranges of 0.05 to 0.1 mg twice daily similarly suggests that this
medication may provide some relief for the symptoms of hyperarousal,
impulsivity, and agitation in young children with PTSD.
Second-generation antipsychotics such as risperidone, olanzapine,
quetiapine, ziprasidone, and aripiprazole have been studied in adults with
PTSD with mixed results. Risperidone and aripiprazole both have FDA
approval for use in children and adolescents with aggression, severe
behavioral dyscontrol, and severe psychiatric disorders; however, there are no
controlled trials with children with PTSD. For example, there is one case
series of three preschool-age children who exhibited symptoms of acute
stress disorder and who had severe thermal burns improved after being
treated with risperidone.
In children and adolescents with PTSD, there is one open-label trial of




<<<PAGE 633>>>

the treatment of anxiety disorders in children and adolescents.
A large, multisite investigation by the NIMH (Research Units in Pediatric
Psychopharmacology [RUPP]) confirmed the safety and efficacy of
fluvoxamine in the treatment of childhood separation anxiety disorder,
generalized anxiety disorder, and social anxiety disorder. This double-blind,
placebo-controlled study of 128 children and adolescents revealed that 76
percent of children in the group treated with fluvoxamine showed significant
improvement compared with 29 percent of those in the placebo group.
Response to medication was noticeable after only 2 weeks of treatment.
Fluvoxamine dosages ranged from 50 to 250 mg/day in children and up to
300 mg/day in adolescents. Children and adolescents with less comorbid
depressive symptoms had the best response. Youths who responded
continued fluvoxamine for 6 months, and almost all of them continued to be
responders at the 6-month mark.
Several other randomized clinical trials have also supported the efficacy of
SSRIs in the treatment of child and adolescent anxiety disorders. A
randomized, controlled trial found fluoxetine, at a dose of 20 mg/day, to be
safe and effective for children with these disorders, with minor side effects
including gastrointestinal distress, headache, and drowsiness. Also, a
randomized clinical trial for the treatment of generalized anxiety disorder in
children lends support for the efficacy of sertraline. Finally, a large industry
randomized clinical trial of paroxetine in the treatment of children with social
anxiety disorder found that paroxetine was associated with a response in 78
percent of children treated. The dose of paroxetine was 10 to 50 mg/day.
The FDA has placed a “black box” warning on antidepressants, including
all of the SSRI agents, used in the treatment of any childhood disorder,
because of concerns about increased suicidality; however, no individual
childhood anxiety study has found a statistically significant increase in
suicidal thoughts or behaviors.
Currently, we do not recommend using tricyclic drugs due to their
potentially serious cardiac adverse effects. Other agents, including buspirone
and β-adrenergic receptor antagonists such as propranolol, have been used
clinically in children with anxiety disorders, but currently, no data support
their efficacy. Diphenhydramine may be used in the short term to control
sleep disturbances in children with anxiety disorders. Open trials and one
double-blind, placebo-controlled study suggested that alprazolam, a




<<<PAGE 909>>>

through overmedication; if the patient is sleepy, it is best to omit the next
scheduled dose. When taking a short-acting drug, such as lorazepam, the
patient must not miss any dose because rapid changes in benzodiazepine
concentrations in the blood can precipitate severe withdrawal.
A social model program of detoxification saves money by avoiding
medications while using social supports. This less-expensive regimen can be
helpful for mild or moderate withdrawal syndromes. Some clinicians also use
β-adrenergic receptor antagonists (e.g., propranolol) or α-adrenergic receptor
agonists (e.g., clonidine) to block the symptoms of sympathetic hyperactivity.
However, these medications do not appear to be superior to benzodiazepines.
Unlike the brain depressants, these other agents are not effective treatments
for seizures or delirium.
Table 4-12
An Example Treatment for Alcohol Withdrawal
Day 1: chlordiazepoxide 25 mg by mouth 3–4 times daily, hold if
sedated
1–2 additional doses if
The patient is jittery
Has increased tremor
Has autonomic dysfunction
Day 2: give the total dose used on day 1 minus 20% divided across
3–4 doses
Following days: continue a 20% decrease until no further medication
is needed (4–5 days)
Severe Withdrawal. For the approximately 1 percent of alcoholic patients
with extreme autonomic dysfunction, agitation, and confusion—that is, those
with alcohol withdrawal delirium, or DTs—no optimal treatment has yet been
developed. The best treatment for DTs is prevention. When that is not
possible, the first step is to ask why such a severe and relatively uncommon
withdrawal syndrome has occurred. The answer often relates to a severe
concomitant medical problem that needs immediate treatment.
Once a delirium appears, the treatment remains similar to that for the
standard withdrawal but with higher doses. Example regimens are 50 to 100




<<<PAGE 1138>>>

derangements.
EXTRAPYRAMIDAL SIDE EFFECTS. Most first-generation antipsychotics cause

extrapyramidal side effects, including parkinsonian symptoms, dystonias, and
akathisia. Although less common in second-generation antipsychotics,
extrapyramidal effects can still occur.
Clinicians have several alternatives for treating these side effects. These
include reducing the dose of the antipsychotic, adding an antiparkinson
medication, and changing the patient to a medication that is less likely to
cause extrapyramidal side effects. The most effective antiparkinson
medications are anticholinergic antiparkinson drugs. However, these
medications have additional side effects, including dry mouth, constipation,
blurred vision, and, often, memory loss. Also, these medications are often
only partially effective, leaving patients with substantial amounts of lingering
extrapyramidal side effects. Centrally acting β-blockers, such as propranolol,
may help treat akathisia. Most patients respond to dosages between 30 and 90
mg per day.
If prescribing conventional antipsychotics, clinicians may consider
prescribing prophylactic antiparkinson medications for patients who are
likely to experience disturbing extrapyramidal side effects. These include
patients who have a history of extrapyramidal side effect sensitivity and those
treated with relatively high doses of high-potency drugs. Prophylactic
antiparkinson medications may help when prescribing high-potency drugs for
young men, who tend to have an increased vulnerability for developing
dystonias. Again, these patients should be candidates for newer drugs.
Some individuals are highly sensitive to extrapyramidal side effects at the
dose that is necessary to control their psychosis. For many of these patients,
medication side effects may seem worse than the illness itself. These patients
should be treated routinely with a medication less likely to cause
extrapyramidal side effects. Risperidone may cause extrapyramidal side
effects even at low doses—for example, 0.5 mg—but the severity and risk are
increased at higher doses—for example, more than 6 mg. Olanzapine and
ziprasidone are also associated with dose-related parkinsonism and akathisia.
About 20 to 30 percent of patients on long-term
treatment with a first-generation antipsychotic will exhibit symptoms of
TARDIVE DYSKINESIA.




<<<PAGE 1676>>>

Clonidine (Catapres)

+

+

Methyldopa (Aldomet)

+

+

Spironolactone
(Aldactone)

+

–

Hydrochlorothiazide

+

–

Guanethidine (Ismelin)

+

+

Alcohol

+

+

Barbiturates

+

+

Cannabis

+

–

Cocaine

+

+

Heroin

+

+

Methadone

+

–

Morphine

+

+

Antiparkinsonian agents

+

+

Clofibrate (Atromid-S)

+

–

Digoxin (Lanoxin)

+

–

Glutethimide (Doriden)

+

+

Indomethacin (Indocin)

+

–

Phentolamine (Regitine)

–

+

Propranolol (Inderal)

+

–

Commonly abused substances

Miscellaneous drugs

aThe incidence of male erectile disorder associated with the use of tricyclic drugs is low.
bTrazodone has been causative in some cases of priapism.
cAll SSRIs can produce sexual dysfunction, more commonly, in men.
dImpairment of sexual function is not a common complication of the use of antipsychotics.




<<<PAGE 1890>>>

Benztropine

Cogentin

PO 0.5–2 mg Acute dystonia,
tid; IM or
parkinsonism,
IV 1–2 mg
akinesia, akathisia

Biperiden

Akineton

PO 2–6 mg
tid; IM or
IV 2 mg

Procyclidine

Kemadrin

PO 2.5–5 mg
bid-qid

Trihexyphenidyl

Artane,
Tremin

PO 2–5 mg
tid

Orphenadrine

Norflex,
Disipal

PO 50–100 Rabbit syndrome
mg bid-qid;
IV 60 mg

Antihistamine
Diphenhydramine Benadryl

Amantadine

PO 25 mg
qid; IM or
IV 25 mg

Acute dystonia,
parkinsonism,
akinesia, rabbit
syndrome

Symmetrel PO 100–200 Parkinsonism,
mg bid
akinesia, rabbit
syndrome

β-Adrenergic
Antagonist
Propranolol

Inderal

PO 20–40
mg tid

Akathisia, tremor

Catapres

PO 0.1 mg
tid

Akathisia

α-Adrenergic
Antagonist
Clonidine




<<<PAGE 1897>>>

1. The lowest possible dose of the psychiatric drug should be taken.
2. Patients should minimize caffeine consumption.
3. The psychiatric drug should be taken at bedtime to minimize the amount
of daytime tremor.
4. β-Adrenergic receptor antagonists (e.g., propranolol [Inderal]) can be
given to treat drug-induced tremors.
Other Medication-Induced Movement Disorders
NOCTURNAL MYOCLONUS. Nocturnal myoclonus consists of highly
stereotyped, abrupt contractions of specific leg muscles during sleep. Patients
lack any subjective awareness of the leg jerks. The condition may be present
in about 40 percent of persons over 65 years of age. The cause is unknown,
but it is a rare side effect of SSRIs.
The repetitive leg movements occur every 20 to 60 seconds, with
extensions of the large toe and flexion of the ankle, the knee, and the hips.
Frequent awakenings, unrefreshing sleep, and daytime sleepiness are
significant symptoms. No treatment for nocturnal myoclonus is universally
effective. Benzodiazepines, levodopa (Larodopa), quinine, and, in rare cases,
opioids may be useful.
In restless leg syndrome, persons feel deep
sensations of creeping inside the calves whenever sitting or lying down. The
dysesthesias are rarely painful but are agonizingly relentless and cause an
almost irresistible urge to move the legs; thus, this syndrome interferes with
sleep and with falling asleep. It peaks in middle age and occurs in 5 percent
of the population. The cause is unknown, but it is a rare side effect of SSRIs.
Symptoms are relieved by movement and by leg massage. The dopamine
receptor agonists ropinirole (Requip) and pramipexole (Mirapex) are
effective in treating this syndrome. Other treatments include the
benzodiazepines, levodopa, quinine, opioids, propranolol, valproate, and
carbamazepine.
RESTLESS LEG SYNDROME.

Hyperthermic Syndromes. All the medication-induced movement
disorders may be associated with hyperthermia. Table 21-6 lists the various
conditions associated with hyperthermia.




<<<PAGE 1924>>>

reactions and potential safety hazards warrant a warning label called a black
box label. The FDA typically negotiates final labeling language with the
company; however, in cases where a company refuses to satisfy the FDA, the
agency may initiate proceedings to remove the drug from clinical use. In
recent years, warning labels have been applied to entire classes of
psychotropic drugs, including the SDAs and antidepressants such as the
SSRIs.
The product information may also contain a “Contraindications” heading.
This section describes instances in which the drug should not be used because
the risk of using it outweighs the benefit. If no contraindications are known,
this section of the labeling will state “None known.”
A Precautions section may contain precautions for most individuals taking
the drug, as well as for specific groups, such as pregnant women, nursing
mothers, or children. In this section, one will find recommendations for
patients to ensure the safe and effective use of the drug. For example, there
may be precautions about driving when taking the medication or using
substances such as other drugs, food, or alcohol that may have harmful
effects if taken while using the medication. The precautions section also
provides information about laboratory tests needed to track responses or to
identify adverse reactions to the drug or about known interactions with other
drugs, foods, or ingredients.
Every product label has an Adverse Reaction section that lists the
frequency of undesirable effects that may be associated with the use of a
drug. Causes of adverse reactions can include medication errors, such as
overdosage, or interactions between different drugs or between drugs and
certain foods.

NONAPPROVED DOSAGES AND USES
It is now common practice to treat psychiatric disorders with drugs that are
approved for nonpsychiatric conditions. Some examples include propranolol
(Inderal) for social anxiety and treatment of lithium-induced tremor;
verapamil (Calan, Isoptin) for mania and treatment of MAOI-induced
hypertensive crisis; levothyroxine (Levoxyl) for antidepressant augmentation;
clonidine (Catapres) and guanfacine (Tenex) for posttraumatic stress disorder
(PTSD); dextroamphetamine (Dexedrine) for antidepressant augmentation;




<<<PAGE 1964>>>

antagonists

inhibits metabolism of
propranolol;
antipsychotic increases
plasma concentrations

Anticholinergics

Pharmacodynamic effects

Decreased
antipsychotic
effect

Additive anticholinergic
effect

Anticholinergic
toxicity

Barbiturates

Phenobarbital induces
Decreased
antipsychotic metabolism
antipsychotic
concentrations

Carbamazepine

Induces antipsychotic
metabolism

Charcoal

Reduces GI absorption of May reduce
antipsychotic and
antipsychotic
adsorbs drug during
effect or cause
enterohepatic circulation
toxicity when used
to treat overdose
or for GI
disturbances

Cigarette
smoking

Induction of microsomal
enzymes

Up to 50% reduction
in antipsychotic
concentrations

Reduced plasma
concentrations of
antipsychotic
agents

Epinephrine,
Antipsychotic antagonizes
norepinephrine
pressor effect

Hypotension

Ethanol

Impaired
psychomotor
status

Additive CNS depression




<<<PAGE 1967>>>

Phenothiazines, especially thioridazine, may decrease the metabolism of
and cause toxic concentrations of phenytoin. Barbiturates may increase the
metabolism of DRAs.
Tricyclic drugs and SSRIs that inhibit CYP2D6—paroxetine (Paxil),
fluoxetine (Prozac), and fluvoxamine (Luvox)—interact with DRAs,
resulting in increased plasma concentrations of both drugs. The
anticholinergic, sedative, and hypotensive effects of the drugs may also be
cumulative.
Typical antipsychotics may inhibit the hypotensive effects of αmethyldopa (Aldomet). Conversely, typical antipsychotics may have an
additive effect on some hypotensive drugs. Antipsychotic drugs have a
variable effect on the hypotensive effects of clonidine. Propranolol (Inderal)
coadministration increases the blood concentrations of both drugs.
The DRAs potentiate the CNS-depressant effects of the sedatives,
antihistamines, opiates, opioids, and alcohol, particularly in persons with
impaired respiratory status. When these agents are taken with alcohol, the
risk for heatstroke may be increased.
Cigarette smoking may decrease the plasma levels of the typical
antipsychotic drugs. Epinephrine has a paradoxical hypotensive effect in
persons taking typical antipsychotics. These drugs may decrease the blood
concentration of warfarin (Coumadin), resulting in decreased bleeding time.
The phenothiazines, thioridazine, and pimozide should not be coadministered
with other agents that prolong the QT interval. Thioridazine is
contraindicated in patients taking drugs that inhibit the CYP2D6 isoenzyme
or in patients with reduced levels of CYP2D6.
Laboratory Interferences
Chlorpromazine and perphenazine (Trilafon) may cause both false-positive
and false-negative results in immunologic pregnancy tests and falsely
elevated bilirubin (with reagent test strips) and urobilinogen (with Ehrlich
reagent test) values. These drugs are associated with an abnormal shift in the
results of the glucose tolerance test. However, that shift may reflect the
effects of the drugs on the glucose-regulating system. Phenothiazines have
been reported to interfere with the measurement of 17-ketosteroids and 17hydroxycorticosteroids and produce false-positive results in tests for




<<<PAGE 1993>>>

CYP2D6 enzyme. Cimetidine can increase the concentration of sertraline and
paroxetine, and phenobarbital (Luminal) and phenytoin can decrease the
concentration of paroxetine. Because of the potential for interference with the
CYP2D6 enzyme, the coadministration of paroxetine with other
antidepressants, phenothiazines, and antiarrhythmic drugs should be
undertaken with caution. Paroxetine may increase the anticoagulant effect of
warfarin. Coadministration of paroxetine and tramadol may precipitate
serotonin syndrome in elderly persons.
Fluvoxamine. Among the SSRIs, fluvoxamine appears to present the most
risk for drug–drug interactions. Fluvoxamine is metabolized by the enzyme
CYP3A4, which may be inhibited by ketoconazole (Nizoral). Fluvoxamine
may increase the half-life of alprazolam, triazolam (Halcion), and diazepam,
and it should not be coadministered with these agents. Fluvoxamine may
increase theophylline levels threefold and warfarin levels twofold, with
significant clinical consequences; thus, the serum levels of the latter drugs
should be closely monitored, and the doses adjusted accordingly.
Fluvoxamine raises concentrations and may increase the activity of clozapine,
carbamazepine, methadone (Dolophine, Methadose), propranolol (Inderal),
and diltiazem (Cardizem). Fluvoxamine has no significant interactions with
lorazepam (Ativan) or digoxin (Lanoxin).
Citalopram. Citalopram is not a potent inhibitor of any CYP enzymes.
Concurrent administration of cimetidine increases concentrations of
citalopram by about 40 percent. Citalopram does not significantly affect the
metabolism of, nor is its metabolism significantly affected by, digoxin,
lithium, warfarin, carbamazepine, or imipramine (Tofranil). Citalopram
increases the plasma concentrations of metoprolol (Lopressor) twofold, but
this usually does not affect BP or heart rate. Data on coadministration of
citalopram and potent inhibitors of CYP3A4 or CYP2D6 are not available.
Escitalopram. Escitalopram is a moderate inhibitor of CYP2D6 and has
been shown to raise desipramine (Norpramin) and metoprolol concentrations
significantly.
Vilazodone. Vilazodone dose should be reduced to 20 mg when




<<<PAGE 2029>>>

risks may be increased during pregnancy or the postpartum period, the risks
and benefits of continuing or withdrawing treatment need to be discussed
with the patient and weighed carefully.
Precautions. The TCAs may cause a withdrawal syndrome in newborns
consisting of tachypnea, cyanosis, irritability, and poor sucking reflex. The
drugs do pass into breast milk but at concentrations that are usually
undetectable in the infant’s plasma. We should use these drugs cautiously in
patients with hepatic or renal diseases. The TCAs should not be administered
during a course of ECT, primarily because of the risk of serious adverse
cardiac effects.
Drug Interactions
Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors. The TCAs should not be taken within
14 days of administration of an MAOI.
Antihypertensives. The TCAs block the therapeutic effects of
antihypertensive medication. The TCAs may block the antihypertensive
effects of the β-adrenergic receptor antagonists (e.g., propranolol [Inderal]
and clonidine [Catapres]). The coadministration of a TCA and α-methyldopa
(Aldomet) may cause behavioral agitation.
Antiarrhythmic Drugs. The antiarrhythmic properties of TCAs can be
additive to those of quinidine, an effect that is further exacerbated by the
inhibition of TCA metabolism by quinidine.
Dopamine Receptor Antagonists. Concurrent administration of TCAs
and DRAs increases the plasma concentrations of both drugs. Desipramine
plasma concentrations may increase twofold during concurrent administration
with perphenazine (Trilafon). The DRAs also add to the anticholinergic and
sedative effects of the TCAs. Concomitant use of SDAs also increases those
effects.
Central Nervous System Depressants. Opioids, alcohol, anxiolytics,
hypnotics, and over-the-counter cold medications have additive effects by
causing CNS depression when coadministered with TCAs. Persons should be




<<<PAGE 2056>>>

abnormal heartbeat and other symptoms (such as severe dizziness, fainting,
shortness of breath) that need medical attention right away. Before starting
lithium treatment, clinicians should ask about known heart conditions,
unexplained fainting, and family history of problems or sudden unexplained
death before age 45.
Gastrointestinal Effects. GI symptoms—which include nausea,
decreased appetite, vomiting, and diarrhea—can be diminished by dividing
the dosage, administering the lithium with food, or switching to another
lithium preparation. The lithium preparation least likely to cause diarrhea is
lithium citrate. Some lithium preparations contain lactose, which can cause
diarrhea in lactose-intolerant persons. Persons taking slow-release
formulations of lithium who experience diarrhea caused by unabsorbed
medication in the lower part of the GI tract may experience less diarrhea than
with standard-release preparations. Diarrhea may also respond to
antidiarrheal preparations such as loperamide (Imodium, Kaopectate),
bismuth subsalicylate (Pepto-Bismol), or diphenoxylate with atropine
(Lomotil).
Weight Gain. Weight gain results from a poorly understood effect of
lithium on carbohydrate metabolism. Weight gain can also result from
lithium-induced hypothyroidism, lithium-induced edema, or excessive
consumption of soft drinks and juices to quench lithium-induced thirst.
Neurologic Effects
TREMOR. A lithium-induced postural tremor may occur that is usually 8 to 12
Hz and is most notable in outstretched hands, especially in the fingers, and
during tasks involving fine manipulations. The tremor can be reduced by
dividing the daily dosage, using a sustained-release formulation, reducing
caffeine intake, reassessing the concomitant use of other medicines, and
treating comorbid anxiety. β-Adrenergic receptor antagonists, such as
propranolol, 30 to 120 mg a day in divided doses, and primidone (Mysoline),
50 to 250 mg a day, are usually effective in reducing the tremor. In persons
with hypokalemia, potassium supplementation may improve the tremor.
When a person taking lithium has a severe tremor, the possibility of lithium
toxicity should be suspected and evaluated.




<<<PAGE 2066>>>

concentrations, and toxicity
Calcium channel
inhibitors

Case reports of neurotoxicity; no consistent
pharmacokinetic interactions

Miscellaneous
Succinylcholine,
pancuronium

Reports of prolonged neuromuscular blockade

Metronidazole

Increased lithium concentration

Methyldopa

Few reports of neurotoxicity

Sodium
bicarbonate

Increased renal lithium clearance

Iodides

Additive antithyroid effects

Propranolol

Used for lithium tremor; possible slight increase
in lithium concentration

NSAID, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug; ACEI, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor.

Laboratory Monitoring. The periodic measurement of serum lithium
concentration is an essential aspect of patient care, but it should always be
combined with sound clinical judgment. A laboratory report listing the
therapeutic range as 0.5 to 1.2 mEq/L may lull a clinician into disregarding
early signs of lithium intoxication in patients whose levels are around 1.2
mEq/L. Clinical toxicity, especially in elderly persons, has been well
documented at or slightly above the upper limit of the therapeutic range.
Regular monitoring of serum lithium concentrations is essential. Lithium
levels should be obtained every 2 to 6 months except when there are signs of
toxicity, during dosage adjustments, and in persons suspected to be
noncompliant with the prescribed dosages. Under these circumstances, levels
may be done weekly. Baseline ECG studies are essential and should be
repeated annually.
When obtaining blood for lithium levels, patients should be at steady-state
lithium dosing (usually after 5 days of constant dosing), preferably using a
twice-daily or thrice-daily dosing regimen, and the blood sample must be
drawn 12 hours (±30 minutes) after a given dose. Lithium concentrations 12




<<<PAGE 2127>>>

benzodiazepines in the past, especially in recent months, may find that
buspirone is not as effective as the benzodiazepines in the treatment of their
anxiety. This difference might be explained by the absence of the immediate
mildly euphoric and sedative effects of benzodiazepines. The
coadministration of buspirone and benzodiazepines may be useful in the
treatment of persons with anxiety disorders who have not responded to
treatment with either drug alone.

β-ADRENERGIC RECEPTOR ANTAGONISTS
Because of the innervations of many, if not most, peripheral organs and
vasculature by the sympathetic division of the autonomic nervous system,
their functions are ultimately controlled, in part, by one of the two major
classes of adrenergic receptors: α-receptors (see Table 33-2) and β-receptors.
These receptors are further subdivided based on their action and location, and
they are located both peripherally and in the CNS. Shortly after being
introduced for cardiac indications, propranolol (Inderal) was reported to be
useful for agitation, and its use in psychiatry spread rapidly. The five most
commonly used β-receptor antagonists in psychiatry are propranolol, nadolol
(Corgard), metoprolol (Lopressor, Toprol), pindolol (Visken), and atenolol
(Tenormin) (Table 21-45).
Pharmacologic Actions
The β-receptor antagonists differ concerning lipophilicities, metabolic routes,
β-receptor selectivity, and half-lives. The absorption of the β-receptor
antagonists from the GI tract is variable. The agents that are most soluble in
lipids (i.e., are lipophilic) are likely to cross the blood–brain barrier and enter
the brain; those agents that are least lipophilic are less likely to enter the
brain. When CNS effects are desired, a lipophilic drug may be preferred;
when only peripheral effects are desired, a less lipophilic drug may be
indicated.
Table 21-45
β-Adrenergic Drugs Used in Psychiatry




<<<PAGE 2128>>>

Whereas propranolol, nadolol, pindolol, and labetalol (Normodyne,
Trandate) have nearly equal potency at both the β1- and β2-receptors,
metoprolol and atenolol have a greater affinity for the β1-receptor than for the
β2-receptor. Relative β1-selectivity confers few pulmonary and vascular
effects of these drugs, although they must be used with caution in persons
with asthma because the drugs retain some activity at the β2-receptors.
Pindolol has sympathomimetic effects in addition to its β-antagonist
effects, which has allowed its use for augmentation of antidepressant drugs.
Pindolol, propranolol, and nadolol possess some antagonist activity at the
serotonin 5-HT1A receptors.
Therapeutic Indications
Anxiety Disorders. Propranolol is useful for the treatment of social anxiety
disorder, primarily of the performance type (e.g., disabling anxiety before a
musical performance). Data are also available for its use in the treatment of
panic disorder, PTSD, and GAD. In social anxiety disorder, the standard
treatment approach is to take 10 to 40 mg of propranolol 20 to 30 minutes
before the anxiety-provoking situation. The β-receptor antagonists are less
useful for the treatment of panic disorder than are benzodiazepines or SSRIs.
Lithium-Induced Postural Tremor. The β-receptor antagonists are
beneficial for lithium-induced postural tremor and other medication-induced
postural tremors—for example, those induced by TCAs and valproate




<<<PAGE 2129>>>

(Depakene). The initial approach to this movement disorder includes
lowering the dose of lithium (Eskalith), eliminating aggravating factors, such
as caffeine, and administering lithium at bedtime. If these interventions are
inadequate, however, propranolol in the range of 20 to 160 mg a day taken
two or three times daily is generally sufficient for the treatment of lithiuminduced postural tremor.
Neuroleptic-Induced Acute Akathisia. Many studies have shown that βreceptor antagonists can be effective in the treatment of neuroleptic-induced
acute akathisia. They are generally more effective for this indication than are
anticholinergics and benzodiazepines. The β-receptor antagonists are not
effective in the treatment of such neuroleptic-induced movement disorders as
acute dystonia and parkinsonism.
Aggression and Violent Behavior. The β-receptor antagonists may be
useful in reducing the number of aggressive and violent outbursts in persons
with impulse disorders, schizophrenia, and aggression associated with brain
injuries such as trauma, tumors, anoxic injury, encephalitis, alcohol use
disorders, and degenerative disorders (e.g., Huntington disease).
Alcohol Withdrawal. Propranolol is reported to be useful as an adjuvant to
benzodiazepines but not as a sole agent in the treatment of alcohol
withdrawal. The following dose schedule is suggested: no propranolol for a
pulse rate below 50 beats/min; 50-mg propranolol for a pulse rate between 50
and 79 beats/min; and 100-mg propranolol for a pulse rate of 80 beats/min or
above.
Antidepressant Augmentation. Pindolol has been used to augment and
hasten the antidepressant effects of SSRIs, tricyclic drugs, and ECT. Small
studies have shown that pindolol administered at the onset of antidepressant
therapy may shorten the usual 2- to 4-week latency of antidepressant
response by several days. Because the β-receptor antagonists may induce
depression in some persons, augmentation strategies with these drugs need to
be further clarified in controlled trials.
Other Disorders. Several case reports and controlled studies have reported




<<<PAGE 2132>>>

The most common adverse effects of β-receptor antagonists are
hypotension and bradycardia. In persons at risk for these adverse effects, a
test dosage of 20 mg a day of propranolol can be given to assess the reaction
to the drug. Depression has been associated with lipophilic β-receptor
antagonists, such as propranolol, but it is probably rare. Nausea, vomiting,
diarrhea, and constipation can also be caused by treatment with these agents.
The β-receptor antagonists may blunt cognition in some people. Other more
severe CNS adverse effects (e.g., agitation, confusion, and hallucinations) are
rare. Table 21-47 lists the possible adverse effects of β-receptor antagonists.
Drug Interactions
Antipsychotics, anticonvulsants, theophylline (Theo-Dur, Slo-bid), and
levothyroxine (Synthroid) have increased plasma concentrations when given
with propranolol. Other β-receptor antagonists may have similar effects. The
β-receptor antagonists that are eliminated by the kidneys may have similar
effects on drugs that are also eliminated by the renal route. Barbiturates,
phenytoin (Dilantin), and cigarette smoking increase the elimination of βreceptor antagonists that are metabolized by the liver. Several reports have
associated hypertensive crises and bradycardia with the coadministration of
β-receptor antagonists and MAOIs. Depressed myocardial contractility and
AV nodal conduction can occur from concomitant administration of a βreceptor antagonist and calcium channel inhibitors.
Laboratory Interferences
The β-receptor antagonists do not interfere with standard laboratory tests.
Dosage and Clinical Guidelines
Propranolol is available in 10-, 20-, 40-, 60-, 80-, and 90-mg tablets; 4-, 8-,
and 80-mg/mL solutions; and 60-, 80-, 120-, and 160-mg sustained-release
capsules. Nadolol is available in 20-, 40-, 80-, 120-, and 160-mg tablets.
Pindolol is available in 5- and 10-mg tablets. Metoprolol is available in 50and 100-mg tablets and 50-, 100-, and 200-mg sustained-release tablets.
Atenolol is available in 25-, 50-, and 100-mg tablets. Acebutolol is available
in 200- and 400-mg capsules.
For the treatment of chronic disorders, propranolol administration is




<<<PAGE 2133>>>

usually initiated at 10 mg by mouth three times a day or 20 mg by mouth
twice daily. The dosage can be raised by 20 to 30 mg a day until a therapeutic
effect emerges. The dosage should be leveled off at the appropriate range for
the disorder under treatment. The treatment of aggressive behavior sometimes
requires dosages up to 80 mg a day, and therapeutic effects may not be seen
until the person has been receiving the maximal dosage for 4 to 8 weeks. For
the treatment of social phobia, primarily the performance type, the patient
should take 10 to 40 mg of propranolol 20 to 30 minutes before the
performance.
Pulse and BP readings should be taken regularly, and the drug should be
withheld if the pulse rate is below 50 beats/min or the systolic BP is below 90
mm Hg. The drug should be temporarily discontinued if it produces severe
dizziness, ataxia, or wheezing. Treatment with β-receptor antagonists should
never be discontinued abruptly. Propranolol should be tapered by 60 mg a
day until a dosage of 60 mg a day is reached. After that, the drug should be
tapered by 10 to 20 mg a day every 3 or 4 days.
The clinical guidelines for the other drugs listed in this chapter are similar
to propranolol, taking into consideration the different doses used. For
example, if propranolol is prescribed initially at the lowest available dose
(e.g., 10 mg), then metoprolol should be prescribed at its lowest available
dose (e.g., 50 mg).
Table 21-48
Barbiturate Dosages (Adult)




<<<PAGE 2565>>>

behavior
secondary to fear
and anxiety;
suicidal behavior

reinforcement of
social support

Adolescent crises

Suicidal attempts
Evaluation of suicidal
and ideation;
potential, extent of
substance abuse,
substance abuse,
truancy, trouble
family dynamics;
with law,
crisis-oriented family
pregnancy,
and individual
running away;
therapy;
eating disorders;
hospitalization if
psychosis
necessary;
consultation with
appropriate
extrafamilial
authorities

Agoraphobia

Panic; depression

Alprazolam, 0.25–2 mg;
antidepressant
medication

Agranulocytosis
(clozapine induced)

High fever,
pharyngitis, oral
and perianal
ulcerations

Discontinue medication
immediately;
administer
granulocyte colonystimulating factor

Akathisia

Agitation,
restlessness,
muscle
discomfort;
dysphoria

Reduce antipsychotic
dosage; propranolol
(30–120 mg a day);
benzodiazepines;
diphenhydramine
orally or IV;
benztropine IM

Alcohol-Related Emergencies




<<<PAGE 2576>>>

psychiatrically ill;
one spouse may
be seeking
hospitalization for
the other

histories from both,
psychiatric evaluation
at the time of
presentation; may be
precipitated by onset
of untreated mood
disorder or affective
symptoms caused by
medical illness or
insidious-onset
dementia; referral for
management of the
illness reduces
immediate stress and
enhances the
healthier spouse’s
coping capacity;
children may give
insights available only
to someone intimately
involved in the social
system

Migraine

Throbbing, unilateral Sumatriptan 6 mg IM
headache

Mitral valve prolapse

Associated with
panic disorder;
dyspnea and
palpitations; fear
and anxiety

Echocardiogram;
alprazolam or
propranolol

Neuroleptic malignant
syndrome

Hyperthermia;
muscle rigidity;
autonomic
instability;
parkinsonian

Discontinue
antipsychotic; IV
dantrolene;
bromocriptine orally;
hydration and cooling;




<<<PAGE 3670>>>

migration history, 1049
Implanted cortical stimulation, 739
Imprinting, 1042–1043
Inadequate sleep hygiene, 491
Incentive learning, 1019, 1021
Inderal. See Propranolol
Individual interpersonal psychotherapy, 778
Individualized education plan (IEP), 100, 144
Individualized Family Service Plan (IFSP), 99
Individuals with Disabilities Act, 1990, 93, 100
Inductive reasoning, 1009
Infant development, 887–893
attachment, 891–892, 892t
cognitive development, 890, 890t
developmental landmarks, 887, 888t
emotional and social development, 890–891, 891t
good-enough mothering, 893
infant care, 893
language development, 889–890, 889t
Mahler stages of separation-individuation, 892, 893t
maternal rejection and neglect, 892
parental fit, 893
postmature infants, 887
premature infants, 887, 887f
reflexes and survival systems at birth, 887, 887f, 889
temperament, 891, 891t
Infantile amnesia, 1034
Infantile sexuality, 1061
Infections
and intellectual disability, 106
and schizophrenia, 360
Infectious disease testing, 66–67
intravenous drug use, 66
syphilis, 66
viral hepatitis, 66–67
Inferior temporal cortices (ITCs), 926
Inflammation, disease and, 984f


