<<<PAGE 415>>>

during clozapine use. Its use is generally limited to treatment-resistant
psychotic patients.
Ziprasidone has receptor-blocking properties at the 5-HT2A and D2
receptor sites and carries little risk of extrapyramidal and antihistaminic
effects. No guidelines exist for its use in autistic children with aggressive and
self-injurious behaviors; clinicians sometimes use it to treat these behaviors
in treatment-resistant children. In studies of its use in adults with
schizophrenia, dose ranges of 40 to 160 mg were effective. Adverse effects
include sedation, dizziness, and lightheadedness. Before using this
medication, the clinician should check an electrocardiogram.
Lithium is efficacious in children with aggression without autism spectrum
disorder, and it is used clinically in the treatment of aggressive or selfinjurious behaviors when antipsychotic medications are not helpful.
Agents Used for Behavioral Impairment in Autism Spectrum
Disorder without Evidence of Efficacy. A double-blind study
investigated the efficacy of amantadine, which blocks N-methyl-D-aspartate
(NMDA) receptors, in the treatment of behavioral disturbance, such as
irritability, aggression, and hyperactivity, in children with autism. Some
researchers have suggested that abnormalities of the glutamatergic system
may contribute to the emergence of autism spectrum disorders. High
glutamate levels occur in children with the formerly labeled Rett syndrome.
In the amantadine study, 47 percent of children on amantadine were
“improved” per their parents, and 37 percent of children on placebo were
rated “improved” by parents in irritability and hyperactivity, although this
difference was not statistically significant. Investigators rated the children on
amantadine “significantly improved” for hyperactivity. A double-blind,
placebo-controlled study of the efficacy of the anticonvulsant lamotrigine on
hyperactivity in children with autism showed high rates of placebo
improvement in ratings of hyperactivity, which were similar to response on
the medication.
Clomipramine is sometimes used but lacks RCTs to provide evidence of
positive results. Fenfluramine, which reduces blood serotonin levels, has also
been used but appears to be ineffective. Improvement does not seem to be
associated with a reduction in blood serotonin levels. Naltrexone, an opioid




<<<PAGE 654>>>

nausea, agitation, tremor, and fatigue. Dosage ranges for the various SSRIs
found to have efficacy in randomized clinical trials are the following:
fluoxetine (20 to 60 mg), sertraline (50 to 200 mg), fluvoxamine (up to 200
mg), and paroxetine (up to 50 mg).
Clomipramine was the first antidepressant studied in the treatment of OCD
in childhood and the only tricyclic antidepressant that has FDA approval for
the treatment of anxiety disorders in childhood. Clomipramine was
efficacious in doses up to 200 mg, or 3 mg/kg, whichever is less.
Nevertheless, clomipramine is not recommended as a first-line treatment due
to its higher potential risks compared to other SSRIs, including the
cardiovascular risk of hypotension and arrhythmia and seizure risk.
Pediatric patients with OCD who respond only partially to medications
tend to have at least moderate to severe OCD symptoms, high ratings of
global impairment, and significant comorbidity even after their partial
response to an adequate trial of medication. Augmentation strategies with
medications to enhance serotonergic effects, such as with atypical
antipsychotics (e.g., risperidone), have demonstrated increased response
when SSRIs yield a partial response. Aripiprazole augmentation in 39
adolescents with OCD who did not respond to two trials of monotherapy with
SSRIs led to 59 percent of patients being rated as improved or very much
improved. Patients who responded to aripiprazole were less impaired at
baseline in functional impairment but not in the clinical severity of their
OCD. Aripiprazole’s final mean dose was 12.2 mg/day. This agent may be
useful for pediatric OCD and warrants further controlled trials.
Given the lack of data on discontinuation, recommendations for
maintaining medication such as stabilization, education about relapse risk,
and tapering medication during the summer are likely in order to minimize
academic compromise in case of relapse. For children and adolescents with
more severe or multiple episodes of significant exacerbation of symptoms,
treatment for more than a year is recommended. Overall, the efficacy of
treatment for children and adolescents with OCD is high with choices of
SSRIs and CBT.

EPIDEMIOLOGY
OCD is common among children and adolescents, with a point prevalence of




<<<PAGE 1356>>>

TREATMENT
Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder
Pharmacotherapy. Effective medications include clomipramine and
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs, which, along with
clomipramine and other serotonergic medications, are sometimes called
serotonin reuptake inhibitor [SRIs]). Head-to-head comparisons of
clomipramine and SSRIs show equal efficacy but better tolerability of the
SSRIs. In general, clinicians must use higher doses to achieve an optimal
effect. Examples are doses of 80 mg of fluoxetine or 200 mg of sertraline.
Some patients respond to even higher doses. Exceeding the recommended
doses is not, however, advisable for clomipramine or citalopram, due to
safety concerns. There is also some evidence that response to SRIs is slower
in OCD than in depression; clinicians are therefore encouraged to prescribe
an SRI for at least 12 weeks before deciding to switch agents or augment
with another psychotropic. A general rule of thumb is that we should
continue to use the dose that was required to obtain a response for at least 1
to 2 years. When discontinuing medication, there is a real risk of relapse, so
this should be done very gradually, with small adjustments made every few
months.
Patients who fail to respond to one SRI may respond to another.
The most extensive evidence base is for antipsychotics in adult OCD.
Among those, risperidone and aripiprazole are best supported as adjuncts.
Some studies have indicated that these are particularly useful in patients with
tics, but not all data are consistent. When a response to these agents occurs, it
typically happens relatively quickly (e.g., 4 weeks). When using dopamine
receptor blockers, it is crucial to monitor adverse events.
Memantine, riluzole, ketamine, lamotrigine, and N-acetylcysteine (NAC)
are other promising augmentation agents.
Psychotherapy. There is a long history of understanding OCD symptoms
from a psychodynamic perspective, but there is no rigorous evidence that a
psychodynamic approach is useful in the treatment of OCD. Instead,
empirical research on the psychotherapy of OCD has emerged from
behavioral and cognitive perspectives. Exposure and response prevention




<<<PAGE 1359>>>

model that includes training in decision making and categorizing; exposure
and habituation to discarding; and cognitive restructuring. Treatment includes
both office and in-home sessions. The role of the therapist in this model is to
assist in the development of decision-making skills, to provide feedback
about normal saving behavior, and to identify and challenge the patient’s
erroneous beliefs about possessions. The goal in treatment is to get rid of a
significant amount of possessions and make the living space livable. Also,
treatment can provide the patients with the skills to maintain a positive
balance between the number of possessions and livable space.
Evidence for pharmacologic treatment relies on limited and uncontrolled
data that support the use of SSRIs or venlafaxine.
Hair-Pulling Disorder
Early data indicated that hair-pulling disorder, like OCD and BDD,
responded more robustly to clomipramine than to desipramine.
Unfortunately, subsequent trials of SSRIs and venlafaxine in hair-pulling
disorder have not consistently demonstrated efficacy. The most significant
positive clinical trial to date is with NAC (1200 to 2400 mg/day), a
nutraceutical that acts on the glutamatergic system. However, a trial of NAC
in pediatric hair-pulling disorder was negative. There are small controlled
trials indicating that dopamine receptor blockers may also be useful in these
conditions. Given their favorable side-effect profile, it may be reasonable to
use NAC as a first-line agent in adults with hair-pulling disorder, to use
SSRIs when patients have comorbid conditions for which these agents are
efficacious, and to consider low-dose dopamine receptor blockers in more
treatment-refractory cases.
Habit reversal training (HRT) is a set of cognitive-behavioral techniques
that have been shown efficacious in the treatment of childhood and adult
hair-pulling disorder. Components of HRT include awareness training,
competing for response training, and social support. Also, therapists use
stimulus control (SC) to change the patient’s environment so that hairpulling
is more effortful or less reinforcing. Controlled trials of augmentation of
HRT/SC with acceptance and commitment therapy, dialectical behavior
therapy, or cognitive therapy, have also suggested efficacy in hair-pulling
disorder.




<<<PAGE 1674>>>

drugs, and the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), among others,
have been implicated in retarded ejaculation. Also, we should differentiate
delayed ejaculation from retrograde ejaculation, in which ejaculation occurs
but the seminal fluid passes back into the bladder. Retrograde ejaculation
always has an organic cause. It can develop after genitourinary surgery, and it
is also associated with medications that have anticholinergic adverse effects,
such as the phenothiazines.
Other Female Sexual Dysfunction due to a General Medical
Condition. Some medical conditions—specifically, endocrine diseases such
as hypothyroidism, diabetes mellitus, and primary hyperprolactinemia—can
affect a woman’s ability to have orgasms. Several drugs also affect some
women’s capacity to have orgasms (Table 16-12). Antihypertensive
medications, CNS stimulants, tricyclic drugs, SSRIs, and, frequently,
monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs) have interfered with female
orgasmic capacity. One study of women taking MAOIs, however, found that
after 16 to 18 weeks of pharmacotherapy, the adverse effect of the medication
disappeared, and the women were able to reexperience orgasms, although
they continued taking an undiminished dose of the drug.
Table 16-10
Some Pharmacologic Agents Implicated in Male Sexual
Dysfunctions
Drug

Impairs
Erection

Impairs
Ejaculation

Imipramine (Tofranil)

+

+

Protriptyline (Vivactil)

+

+

Desipramine (Pertofrane)

+

+

Clomipramine (Anafranil)

+

+

Amitriptyline (Elavil)

+

+

Psychiatric drugs
Cyclic drugsa




<<<PAGE 1678>>>

vaginal lubrication, inhibited or delayed orgasm, and decreased or absent
vaginal contractions may occur. Drugs may also enhance sexual responses
and increase the sex drive, but this is less common than adverse effects.
Most antipsychotic drugs are dopamine receptor
antagonists that also block adrenergic and cholinergic receptors, thus
accounting for the adverse sexual effects (Table 16-13). Chlorpromazine and
trifluoperazine are potent anticholinergics, and they impair erection and
ejaculation. With some drugs, the seminal fluid backs up into the bladder
rather than being propelled through the penile urethra. Patients still have a
pleasurable sensation, but the orgasm is dry. When urinating after orgasm,
the urine may be milky white because it contains the ejaculate. The condition
is startling but harmless. Paradoxically, antipsychotics may rarely cause
priapism.
ANTIPSYCHOTIC DRUGS.

Table 16-11
Neurophysiology of Sexual Dysfunction

ANTIDEPRESSANT DRUGS. The tricyclic and tetracyclic antidepressants have

anticholinergic effects that interfere with erection and delay ejaculation.
Because the anticholinergic effects vary among the cyclic antidepressants,
those with the fewest effects (e.g., desipramine) produce the fewest sexual
adverse effects.
Some men report increased sensitivity of the glans that is pleasurable, and
that does not interfere with erection, although it delays ejaculation. In some
cases, however, the tricyclic causes painful ejaculation, perhaps as the result
of interference with seminal propulsion caused by interference with, in turn,
urethral, prostatic, vas, and epididymal smooth muscle contractions.
Clomipramine may increase sex drive in some persons. Selegiline, a selective
MAO type B (MAOB) inhibitor, and bupropion may also increase sex drive,




<<<PAGE 1679>>>

possibly by dopaminergic activity and increased production of
norepinephrine.
Venlafaxine and the SSRIs most often have adverse effects because of the
rise in serotonin levels. A lowering of the sex drive and difficulty reaching
orgasm occur in both sexes. Cyproheptadine, an antihistamine with
antiserotonergic effects, and methylphenidate, with adrenergic effects, may
reverse those adverse effects. Trazodone is associated with the rare
occurrence of priapism, the symptom of prolonged erection in the absence of
sexual stimuli. That symptom appears to result from the α1-adrenergic
antagonism of trazodone.
Table 16-12
Some Pharmacologic Agents Implicated in Inhibited Female
Orgasma
Tricyclic antidepressants
Imipramine (Tofranil)
Clomipramine (Anafranil)
Nortriptyline (Aventyl)
Monoamine oxidase inhibitors
Tranylcypromine (Parnate)
Phenelzine (Nardil)
Isocarboxazid (Marplan)
Dopamine receptor antagonists
Thioridazine (Mellaril)
Trifluoperazine (Stelazine)
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
Fluoxetine (Prozac)
Paroxetine (Paxil)
Sertraline (Zoloft)
Fluvoxamine (Luvox)
Citalopram (Celexa)
aThe interrelation between female sexual dysfunction and pharmacologic agents has been

less extensively evaluated than male reactions. Oral contraceptives are reported to decrease




<<<PAGE 1815>>>

Table 19-12
Pharmacotherapy of
Personality Disorders

Target

Symptom

Domains

of

Choice of Drugs According to Target Symptoms of Personality
Disorders
Target Symptom

Drug/Treatment of
Choice

Not
Recommended

I. Mood Dysregulation and Anxiety
Anxiety
Chronic cognitive

Psychotherapy,
Benzodiazepines
SSRIs, SNRIs,
MAOIs, Low-Dose
Novel
Psychotropics
(aripiprazole,
quetiapine)
Valproate and other
GABA analogs
(clonazepam and
buspirone)

Chronic somatic

MAOIs, SNRIs
(duloxetine,
milnacipran)
Pregabalin and other
GABA analogs,
TCAs, betablockers

Obsessions

SSRIs, Antipsychotics
(quetiapine), TCAs
(clomipramine),
Mild NMDA
antagonists

If used—
benzodiazepines
with long half-life
and short trials
preferred




<<<PAGE 1944>>>

Drug Interactions. Clozapine should not be used with any other drug that
is associated with the development of agranulocytosis or bone marrow
suppression. Such drugs include carbamazepine, phenytoin, propylthiouracil,
sulfonamides, and captopril (Capoten). Lithium combined with clozapine
may increase the risk of seizures, confusion, and movement disorders.
Lithium should not be used in combination with clozapine by persons who
have experienced an episode of neuroleptic malignant syndrome.
Clomipramine (Anafranil) can increase the risk of seizure by lowering the
seizure threshold and by increasing clozapine plasma concentrations.
Risperidone, fluoxetine, paroxetine, and fluvoxamine increase serum
concentrations of clozapine. The addition of paroxetine may precipitate
clozapine-associated neutropenia.
Side Effects. The most common drug-related adverse effects are sedation,
dizziness, syncope, tachycardia, hypotension, electrocardiography (ECG)
changes, nausea, and vomiting. Other common adverse effects include
fatigue, weight gain, various GI symptoms (most commonly constipation),
anticholinergic effects, and subjective muscle weakness. Sialorrhea, or
hypersalivation, is a side effect that begins early in treatment and is most
evident at night. Patients report that their pillows are drenched with saliva.
This side effect is most likely the result of impairment of swallowing.
Although there are reports that clonidine or amitriptyline may help reduce
hypersalivation, the most practical solution is to put a towel over the pillow.
The risk of seizures is about 4 percent in patients taking dosages greater
than 600 mg a day. Leukopenia, granulocytopenia, agranulocytosis, and fever
occur in about 1 percent of patients. During the first year of treatment, there
is a 0.73 percent risk of clozapineinduced agranulocytosis. The risk during the second year is 0.07 percent. For
neutropenia, the risk is 2.32 percent and 0.69 percent, respectively, during the
first and second years of treatment. The only contraindications to the use of
clozapine are a WBC count below 3,500 cells/mm3; a previous bone marrow
disorder; a history of agranulocytosis during clozapine treatment; or the use
of another drug that is known to suppress the bone marrow, such as
carbamazepine (Tegretol).
During the first 6 months of treatment, weekly WBC counts are indicated
to monitor the patient for the development of agranulocytosis. If the WBC




<<<PAGE 1984>>>

modestly beneficial for weight loss. A significant percentage of all persons
who take SSRIs, including fluoxetine, lose weight initially but later may gain
weight. However, all SSRIs may cause initial weight gain.
PREMENSTRUAL DYSPHORIC DISORDER. PMDD is characterized by debilitating

mood and behavioral changes in the week preceding menstruation that
interferes with normal functioning. Sertraline, paroxetine, fluoxetine, and
fluvoxamine have been reported to reduce the symptoms of PMDD.
Controlled trials of fluoxetine and sertraline administered either throughout
the cycle or only during the luteal phase (the 2 weeks between ovulation and
menstruation) showed both schedules to be equally effective.
An additional observation of unclear significance was that fluoxetine was
associated with changing the duration of the menstrual period by more than 4
days, either lengthening or shortening it. The effects of SSRIs on menstrual
cycle length are mostly unknown and may warrant careful monitoring in
women of reproductive age.
Off-Label Uses
The anorgasmic effects of SSRIs make them
useful as a treatment for men with premature ejaculation. The SSRIs permit
intercourse for a significantly more extended period and are reported to
improve sexual satisfaction in couples in which the man has premature
ejaculation. Fluoxetine and sertraline are useful for this purpose.
PREMATURE EJACULATION.

The SSRIs may reduce obsessive-compulsive behavior in
people with paraphilias. The SSRIs diminish the average time per day spent
in unconventional sexual fantasies, urges, and activities. Evidence suggests a
more significant response to sexual obsessions than for paraphilic behavior.
PARAPHILIAS.

Obsessive-compulsive behavior, poor social relatedness, and
aggression are prominent autistic features that may respond to serotonergic
agents such as SSRIs and clomipramine (Anafranil). Sertraline and
fluvoxamine have been shown in controlled and open-label trials to mitigate
aggressiveness, self-injurious behavior, repetitive behaviors, some degree of
language delay, and (rarely) lack of social relatedness in adults with autistic
AUTISM.




<<<PAGE 1998>>>

muscle tension following abrupt discontinuation of vortioxetine 15 or 20
mg/day. It is recommended that the dose be decreased to 10 mg/day for 1
week before full discontinuation of vortioxetine 15 or 20 mg/day.
Vortioxetine is available in 5-, 10-, 15-, and 20-mg tablets.

SELECTIVE SEROTONIN–NOREPINEPHRINE REUPTAKE
INHIBITORS
There are currently four SNRIs approved for use in the United States:
venlafaxine (Effexor and Effexor XR), desvenlafaxine succinate (DVS;
Pristiq), duloxetine (Cymbalta), and levomilnacipran (Fetzima). A fifth
SNRI, milnacipran (Savella), available in other countries as an
antidepressant, has U.S. FDA approval in the United States as a treatment for
fibromyalgia. The term SNRI reflects the belief that the therapeutic effects of
these medications are mediated by concomitant blockade of neuronal
serotonin (5-HT) and norepinephrine uptake transporters. The SNRIs are also
sometimes referred to as dual reuptake inhibitors, a broader functional class
of antidepressant medications that include TCAs such as clomipramine
(Anafranil) and, to a lesser extent, imipramine (Tofranil) and amitriptyline
(Elavil). What distinguishes the SNRIs from TCAs is their relative lack of
affinity for other receptors, especially muscarinic, histaminergic, and the
families of α- and β-adrenergic receptors. This distinction is an important one
because the SNRIs have a more favorable tolerability profile than the older
dual reuptake inhibitors.
Venlafaxine and Desvenlafaxine
Therapeutic Indications. Venlafaxine is approved for the treatment of
four disorders: MDD, GAD, social anxiety disorder, and panic disorder.
MDD is currently the only FDA-approved indication for DVS.
DEPRESSION. The FDA does not recognize any class of antidepressants as

being more effective than any other. This does not mean that differences do
not exist, but no study to date has sufficiently demonstrated such superiority.
It has been argued that direct modulation of serotonin and norepinephrine
may convey more significant antidepressant effects than are exerted by




<<<PAGE 1999>>>

medications that selectively enhance only noradrenergic or serotoninergic
neurotransmission. This more significant therapeutic benefit could result
from an acceleration of postsynaptic adaptation to increased neuronal
signaling, simultaneous activation of two pathways for intracellular signal
transduction, additive effects on the activity of relevant genes such as brainderived neurotrophic factor, or, quite simply, broader coverage of depressive
symptoms. Clinical evidence supporting this hypothesis first emerged in a
pair of studies conducted by the Danish University Antidepressant Group,
which found an advantage for the dual reuptake inhibitor clomipramine
compared with SSRIs citalopram (Celexa) and paroxetine (Paxil). Another
report, which compared the results of a group of patients prospectively
treated with the combination of desipramine (Norpramin) and fluoxetine
(Prozac) with a historical comparison group treated with desipramine alone,
provided additional support. A meta-analysis of 25 inpatient studies
comparing the efficacy of TCAs and SSRIs yielded the most substantial
evidence. Specifically, although the TCAs were found to have a modest
overall advantage, superiority versus SSRIs was almost entirely explained by
the studies that used the TCAs that are considered to be dual reuptake
inhibitors—clomipramine, amitriptyline, and imipramine. Meta-analyses of
head-to-head studies suggest that venlafaxine has the potential to induce
higher rates of remission in depressed patients than do the SSRIs. This
difference in the venlafaxine advantage is about 6 percent. DVS has not been
extensively compared with other classes of antidepressants concerning
efficacy.
The extended-release formulation of
venlafaxine is approved for the treatment of GAD. In clinical trials lasting 6
months, dosages of 75 to 225 mg a day were effective in treating insomnia,
poor concentration, restlessness, irritability, and excessive muscle tension
related to GAD.
GENERALIZED ANXIETY DISORDER.

SOCIAL ANXIETY DISORDER. The extended-release formulation of venlafaxine

is approved for the treatment of social anxiety disorder. Its efficacy was
established in 12-week studies.
OTHER INDICATIONS. Case reports and uncontrolled studies have indicated that




<<<PAGE 2023>>>

Clinically relevant drug interactions may result from competition for enzyme
CYP2D6 among TCAs and quinidine, cimetidine (Tagamet), fluoxetine
(Prozac), sertraline (Zoloft), paroxetine (Paxil), phenothiazines,
carbamazepine (Tegretol), and the type IC antiarrhythmics propafenone
(Rythmol) and flecainide (Tambocor). Concomitant administration of TCAs
and these inhibitors may slow down the metabolism and raise the plasma
concentrations of TCAs. Additionally, genetic variations in the activity of
CYP2D6 may account for up to a 40-fold difference in plasma TCA
concentrations in different persons. The dosage of the TCA may need to be
adjusted to correct changes in the rate of hepatic TCA metabolism.
Table 21-20
Tricyclic and Tetracyclic Drug Preparations

The TCAs block the transporter site for norepinephrine and serotonin, thus
increasing synaptic concentrations of these neurotransmitters. Each drug
differs in its affinity for each of these transporters, with clomipramine
(Anafranil) being the most serotonin selective and desipramine the most
norepinephrine selective of the TCAs. Secondary effects of the TCAs include
antagonism at the muscarinic acetylcholine, histamine H1, and α1- and α2adrenergic receptors. The potency of these effects on other receptors largely
determines the side effect profile of each drug. Amoxapine, nortriptyline,
desipramine, and maprotiline have the least anticholinergic activity; doxepin
has the most antihistaminergic activity. Although they are more likely to
cause constipation, sedation, dry mouth, or lightheadedness than the SSRIs,
the TCAs are less prone to cause sexual dysfunction, significant long-term




<<<PAGE 2024>>>

weight gain, and sleep disturbances than the SSRIs. The half-lives and
plasma clearance for most TCAs are very similar.
Therapeutic Indications
The indications are similar to those for the SSRIs, which have widely
replaced the TCAs. However, the TCAs represent a reasonable alternative for
persons who cannot tolerate the adverse effects of the SSRIs.
Major Depressive Disorder. The treatment of a major depressive episode
and the prophylactic treatment of MDD are the principal indications for using
TCAs. Although the TCAs are effective in the treatment of depression in
persons with bipolar I disorder, they are more likely to induce mania,
hypomania, or cycling than the newer antidepressants, most notably the
SSRIs and bupropion. It is thus not advised that TCAs be routinely used to
treat depression associated with bipolar I or bipolar II disorder.
Melancholic features, prior major depressive episodes, and a family history
of depressive disorders increase the likelihood of therapeutic response. All of
the available TCAs are equally effective in the treatment of depressive
disorders. In the case of a person, however, one tricyclic or tetracyclic may be
useful, and another one may be ineffective. The treatment of a major
depressive episode with psychotic features almost always requires the
coadministration of an antipsychotic drug and an antidepressant.
Although it is used worldwide as an antidepressant, clomipramine is only
approved in the United States for the treatment of OCD.
Panic Disorder with Agoraphobia. Imipramine is the TCA most studied
for panic disorder with agoraphobia, but other TCAs are also useful when
taken at the usual antidepressant dosages. Because of the potential initial
anxiogenic effects of the TCAs, starting dosages should be small, and the
dosage should be titrated upward slowly. Small doses of benzodiazepines
may be used initially to deal with this side effect.
Generalized Anxiety Disorder. The FDA approves the use of doxepin for
the treatment of anxiety disorders. Some research data show that imipramine
may also be useful. Although rarely used anymore, a chlordiazepoxide–
amitriptyline combination (Limbitrol) is available for mixed anxiety and




<<<PAGE 2025>>>

depressive disorders.
Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder. Patients with OCD appear to respond
specifically to clomipramine, as well as the SSRIs. Some improvement is
usually seen in 2 to 4 weeks, but a further reduction in symptoms may
continue for the first 4 to 5 months of treatment. None of the other TCAs
appears to be nearly as effective as clomipramine for the treatment of this
disorder. Clomipramine may also be a drug of choice for depressed persons
with marked obsessive features.
Pain. The TCAs are widely used to treat chronic neuropathic pain and in the
prophylaxis of migraine headache. Amitriptyline is the TCA most often used
in this role. During the treatment of pain, doses are generally lower than those
used in depression; for example, 75 mg of amitriptyline may be sufficient.
These effects also appear more rapidly.
Other Disorders. Childhood enuresis is often treated with imipramine.
Peptic ulcer disease can be treated with doxepin, which has marked
antihistaminergic effects. Other indications for the TCAs are narcolepsy,
nightmare disorder, and PTSD. The drugs are sometimes used for the
treatment of children and adolescents with ADHD, sleepwalking disorder,
separation anxiety disorder, and sleep terror disorder. Clomipramine has also
been used to treat premature ejaculation, movement disorders, and
compulsive behavior in children with autistic disorders; however, because the
TCAs have caused sudden death in several children and adolescents, they
should not be used in children.
Precautions and Adverse Reactions
The TCAs are associated with a wide range of problematic side effects and
can be lethal when taken in overdose.
Psychiatric Effects. The TCAs can induce a switch to mania or
hypomania in susceptible individuals. The TCAs may also exacerbate
psychotic disorders in susceptible persons. At high plasma concentrations
(levels above 300 ng/mL), the anticholinergic effects of the TCAs can cause
confusion or delirium. Patients with dementia are particularly vulnerable to




<<<PAGE 2027>>>

are discontinued. It can result in falls and injuries in affected persons.
Nortriptyline may be the drug least likely to cause this problem. Orthostatic
hypotension is treated with avoidance of caffeine, intake of at least 2 L of
fluid per day, and addition of salt to the diet unless the person is being treated
for hypertension. In persons taking antihypertensive agents, reduction of the
dosage may reduce the risk of orthostatic hypotension. Other possible
autonomic effects are profuse sweating, palpitations, and increased BP.
Although some persons respond to fludrocortisone (Florinef), 0.02 to 0.05 mg
twice a day, the drug has potential toxicities. It is preferable to substitute an
SSRI than to use a mineralocorticoid such as fludrocortisone. The TCAs’ use
should be discontinued several days before elective surgery because of the
occurrence of hypertensive episodes during surgery in persons receiving
TCAs.
Sedation. Sedation is a common effect of the TCAs and may be welcomed
if sleeplessness has been a problem. The sedative effect of the TCAs is a
result of anticholinergic and antihistaminergic activities. Amitriptyline,
trimipramine, and doxepin are the most sedating agents; imipramine,
amoxapine, nortriptyline, and maprotiline are less sedating; and desipramine
and protriptyline are the least sedating agents.
Neurologic Effects. A fine, rapid tremor may occur. Myoclonic twitches
and tremors of the tongue and the upper extremities are common. Rare effects
include speech blockage, paresthesia, peroneal palsies, and ataxia.
Amoxapine is unique in causing parkinsonian symptoms, akathisia, and
even dyskinesia because of the dopaminergic blocking activity of one of its
metabolites. Amoxapine may also cause neuroleptic malignant syndrome in
rare cases. Maprotiline may cause seizures when the dosage is increased too
quickly or is kept at high levels for too long. Clomipramine and amoxapine
may lower the seizure threshold more than other drugs in the class. As a
class, however, the TCAs have a relatively low risk for inducing seizures
except in persons who are at risk for seizures (e.g., persons with epilepsy and
those with brain lesions). Although such persons can still use the TCAs, the
initial dosages should be lower than usual, and subsequent dosage increases
should be gradual.




<<<PAGE 2032>>>

Imipramine

Tofranil

150–300

150–300a

Desipramine

Norpramin,
150–300
Pertofrane

150–300a

Trimipramine Surmontil

150–300

150–300

Amitriptyline

Elavil, Endep 150–300

100–250b

Nortriptyline

Pamelor,
Aventyl

50–150

50–150a (maximum)

Protriptyline

Vivactil

15–60

75–250

Amoxapine

Asendin

150–400

200–500c

Doxepin

Adapin,
Sinequan

150–300

100–250a

Maprotiline

Ludiomil

150–230

150–300a

Clomipramine Anafranil

130–250

50 to 250c

aExact range may vary among laboratories.
bIncludes parent compound and desmethyl metabolite.
cEstimated from limited studies.

The TCAs should be avoided in children except as a last resort. Dosing
guidelines in children for imipramine include initiation at 1.5 mg/kg a day.
The dosage can be titrated to no more than 5 mg/kg a day. In enuresis, the
dosage is usually 50 to 100 mg a day, taken at bedtime. Clomipramine use
can be initiated at 50 mg a day and increased to no more than 3 mg/kg per
day or 200 mg a day.
When TCA treatment is discontinued, the dosage should first be decreased
to three-fourths the maximal dosage for a month. At that time, if no
symptoms are present, drug use can be tapered by 25 mg (5 mg for
protriptyline) every 4 to 7 days. Slow tapering avoids a cholinergic rebound
syndrome consisting of nausea, upset stomach, sweating, headache, neck
pain, and vomiting. This syndrome can be treated by reinstituting a small
dosage of the drug and tapering more slowly than before. Several case reports
note the appearance of rebound mania or hypomania after the abrupt




<<<PAGE 2039>>>

dilated pupils, and hyperactive deep tendon reflexes. Involuntary movements
may be present, particularly in the face and the jaw. Acidification of the urine
markedly hastens the excretion of MAOIs, and dialysis can be of some use.
Phentolamine or chlorpromazine may be useful if hypertension is a problem.
Moclobemide alone in overdosage causes relatively mild and reversible
symptoms.
Drug Interactions
The significant drug–drug interactions involving MAOIs are listed in Table
21-23. Most antidepressants, as well as precursor agents, should be avoided.
Persons should be instructed to tell any other physicians or dentists who are
treating them that they are taking an MAOI. MAOIs may potentiate the
action of CNS depressants, including alcohol and barbiturates. MAOIs should
not be coadministered with serotonergic drugs, such as SSRIs and
clomipramine (Anafranil), because this combination can trigger serotonin
syndrome. The use of lithium or tryptophan with an irreversible MAOI may
also induce serotonin syndrome. Initial symptoms of serotonin syndrome can
include tremor, hypertonicity, myoclonus, and autonomic signs, which can
then progress to hallucinosis, hyperthermia, and even death. Fatal reactions
had occurred when MAOIs were combined with meperidine (Demerol) or
fentanyl (Sublimaze).
Table 21-23
Drugs to Be Avoided during Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitor
Treatment (Partial Listing)
Never Use
Antiasthmatics
Antihypertensives (methyldopa, guanethidine, reserpine)
Buspirone
Levodopa
Opioids (especially meperidine, dextromethorphan,
propoxyphene, tramadol; morphine or codeine may be less
dangerous)
Cold, allergy, or sinus medications containing dextromethorphan




<<<PAGE 2040>>>

or sympathomimetics
SSRIs, clomipramine, venlafaxine, sibutramine
Sympathomimetics (amphetamines, cocaine, methylphenidate,
dopamine, epinephrine, norepinephrine, isoproterenol,
ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, phenylpropanolamine)
L-Tryptophan
Use Carefully
Anticholinergics
Antihistamines
Disulfiram
Bromocriptine
Hydralazine
Sedative-hypnotics
Terpin hydrate with codeine
Tricyclics and tetracyclics (avoid clomipramine)
SSRI, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor.

When switching from an irreversible MAOI to any other type of
antidepressant drug, persons should wait at least 14 days after the last dose of
the MAOI before beginning the use of the next drug to allow replenishment
of the body’s MAOs. When switching from an antidepressant to an
irreversible MAOI, persons should wait 10 to 14 days (or 5 weeks for
fluoxetine [Prozac]) before starting the use of the MAOI to avoid drug–drug
interactions. In contrast, MAO activity recovers completely 24 to 48 hours
after the last dose of a RIMA.
The effects of the MAOIs on hepatic enzymes are poorly studied.
Tranylcypromine inhibits CYP2C19. Moclobemide inhibits CYP2D6,
CYP2C19, and CYP1A2 and is a substrate for 2C19.
Cimetidine (Tagamet) and fluoxetine significantly reduce the elimination
of moclobemide. Modest doses of fluoxetine and moclobemide administered
concurrently may be well tolerated, with no significant pharmacodynamic or
pharmacokinetic interactions.
Laboratory Interferences
MAOIs may lower blood glucose concentrations. MAOIs artificially raise




<<<PAGE 2090>>>

consisting of fever, rash, eosinophilia, and possibly fatal myocarditis.
Cleft palate, fingernail hypoplasia, microcephaly, and spina bifida in
infants may be associated with the maternal use of carbamazepine during
pregnancy. Pregnant women should not use carbamazepine unless necessary.
All women with childbearing potential should take 1 to 4 mg of folic acid
daily, even if they are not trying to conceive. Carbamazepine is secreted in
breast milk.
Drug Interactions. Carbamazepine decreases serum concentrations of
numerous drugs as a result of the prominent induction of hepatic CYP3A4
(Table 21-39). Monitoring for a decrease in clinical effects is frequently
indicated. Carbamazepine can decrease the blood concentrations of oral
contraceptives, resulting in breakthrough bleeding and uncertain prophylaxis
against pregnancy. Carbamazepine should not be administered with MAOIs,
which should be discontinued at least 2 weeks before initiating treatment with
carbamazepine. Grapefruit juice inhibits the hepatic metabolism of
carbamazepine. When carbamazepine and valproate are used in combination,
the dosage of carbamazepine should be decreased because valproate displaces
carbamazepine binding on proteins, and the dosage of valproate may need to
be increased.
Table 21-39
Carbamazepine: Drug Interactions
Effect of Carbamazepine on Plasma Agents that May Affect
Concentrations of Concomitant
Carbamazepine Plasma
Agents
Concentrations
Carbamazepine may decrease drug Agents that may increase
plasma concentration of:
carbamazepine plasma
Acetaminophen
concentration:
Alprazolam
Allopurinol
Amitriptyline
Cimetidine
Bupropion
Clarithromycin
Clomipramine
Danazol
Clonazepam
Diltiazem
Clozapine
Erythromycin




<<<PAGE 2091>>>

Cyclosporine
Desipramine
Dicumarol
Doxepin
Doxycycline
Ethosuximide
Felbamate
Fentanyl
Fluphenazine
Haloperidol
Hormonal contraceptives
Imipramine
Lamotrigine
Methadone
Methsuximide
Methylprednisolone
Nimodipine
Pancuronium
Phensuximide
Phenytoin
Primidone
Theophylline
Valproate
Warfarin
Carbamazepine may increase drug
plasma concentrations of
Clomipramine
Phenytoin
Primidone

Fluoxetine
Fluvoxamine
Gemfibrozil
Itraconazole
Ketoconazole
Isoniazida
Itraconazole
Lamotrigine
Loratadine
Macrolides
Nefazodone
Nicotinamide
Propoxyphene
Terfenadine
Troleandomycin
Valproatea
Verapamil
Viloxazine
Drugs that may decrease
carbamazepine plasma
concentrations
Carbamazepine
(autoinduction)
Cisplatin
Doxorubicin HCl
Felbamate
Phenobarbital
Phenytoin
Primidone
Rifampinb
Theophylline
Valproate

aIncreased concentrations of the active 10,11-epoxide.
bDecreased concentrations of carbamazepine and increased concentrations of the 10,11-

epoxide.
Table by Carlos A. Zarate, Jr., M.D. and Mauricio Tohen, M.D.




<<<PAGE 3598>>>

for ADHD, 135, 136, 136t
dependence, 304
indications for, 302t
neuropharmacology, 307–308
preparations, 302t
Amygdala, 398
function of, 932
Amylase levels, serum, 65
β-Amyloid, 962
Amyloid plaques, 240
Amyloid precursor protein (APP), 240, 993
Amylophagia, 163
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), 255
Anabolic-androgenic steroids (AAS), 327
Anabolic-androgenic steroid use, 327–330
AAS withdrawal, 329
adverse reactions, 330
clinical features and diagnosis, 328–329
epidemiology, 329
etiology, 330
examples of anabolic steroids, 328t
pathology, 330
treatment, 329
Anabolic steroid–induced mood disorders, 328–329, 329t
Anabolic steroid–induced psychotic disorder, 329
Anabolic steroids, 215
Anaclitic depression, 1013
Anafranil. See Clomipramine
Anal sphincter, relaxation of, 972
Anandamide
neuroprotective action of, 978
neurotransmission of, 975f
structure of, 975f
synthesis of, 973
Anencephaly, neurulation and, 938
Angelman syndrome, 86t
Anger Coping Program, 193




<<<PAGE 3624>>>

arithmetic skills, 48
language disorders, 47–48
limb apraxia, 48
memory disorders, 49–50
motor skills, 50
neuropsychological deficits with left/right hemisphere damage,
47, 47t
spatial disorders, 48–49
referral issue, 50
change in functioning over time, 51
decision-making capacity, assessment of, 51
differential diagnosis, 50–51
forensic evaluation, 51
level of functioning, 50
Clinical tracking systems, 874
Clinician-Administered PTSD Scale (CAPS), 41, 44
Clock drawing, 53t, 54, 55f
Clock genes, 992
Clomipramine, 628
in autism spectrum disorder, 129
for OCD in childhood, 206
Clonazepam, 253t, 602
Clonidine, 607, 608, 683, 694–696, 923, 960
for ADHD, 137
dosage and clinical guidelines, 696
pharmacologic actions, 694
precautions and adverse reactions, 695–696
protocols for opioid detoxification, 695t
for PTSD, 173
symptoms of overdose, 696
therapeutic indications, 694–695
for tic disorder, 160
Cloninger, C. Robert, 560
Closed-ended questions, in interview, 15
Closing of interview, 15–16
Clozapine, 591, 593, 600, 732
assessment of serum concentration of, 63


