<<<PAGE 672>>>

genetic contributions are likely to be significant. Adoption and twin studies
have confirmed that monozygotic twins have about a 50 percent concordance
rate for schizophrenia compared to dizygotic twins who have a concordance
rate of about 10 percent. Also, adopted children of parents with schizophrenia
do not have higher rates of schizophrenia; but biologic children of
schizophrenic parents do. However, genetic factors do not account fully for
the emergence of schizophrenia spectrum disorders, since there is only a 50
percent concordance of exhibiting these disorders among monozygotic twins.
Environmental factors also play an essential role.
Environmental Factors. Early environmental factors that increase the risk
of developing schizophrenia include fetal malnutrition, hypoxia at birth, and
possibly prenatal infections. Other environmental factors include trauma,
stress, social adversity, and isolation. Finally, gene-environment interactions
may influence an individual’s sensitivity to adverse environmental events.

2.17 Adolescent Substance Use Disorders
Substance use is a public health concern among American youth. The most
common substances used by adolescents in the United States are tobacco,
alcohol, and marijuana. There are many other substances that adolescents
may abuse. These include cocaine, heroin, inhalants, phencyclidine (PCP),
lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD), dextromethorphan, anabolic steroids, and
various club drugs, including 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA
or Ecstasy), flunitrazepam, gamma-hydroxybutyrate (GHB), and ketamine.
Approximately 20 percent of 8th graders in the United States have tried
illicit drugs, and about 30 percent of 10th through 12th graders have used an
illicit substance. Alcohol remains the most common substance used and
abused by adolescents. Binge drinking occurs in about 6 percent of
adolescents, and teens with alcohol use disorders are at higher risk of
problems with other substances as well.
The DSM-5 combines abuse and dependence under the diagnosis of
substance use disorder. It also contains diagnoses for intoxication,
withdrawal, and substance-induced disorders. These apply to youths as well




<<<PAGE 676>>>

marijuana use is associated with changes in cerebral blood flow to specific
brain regions, which can be detected by PET. Functional imaging studies
suggest that there is less activity in brain regions involved with attention and
memory in chronic marijuana users. A 15-year follow-up of 50,465 Swedish
males in the military reported that participants who had used marijuana by 18
years of age were 2.4 times more likely to develop schizophrenia. Risks
associated with chronic marijuana use include higher rates of motor vehicle
accidents, impaired respiratory function, increased risk of cardiovascular
disease, and potential increased risk for psychotic symptoms and disorders.
Cocaine
Cocaine can be sniffed or snorted, injected, or smoked. Crack is the term
given to cocaine that has been changed to a free base for smoking. Cocaine’s
effects include constriction of peripheral blood vessels, dilated pupils,
hyperthermia, increased heart rate, and hypertension. High doses or
prolonged use of cocaine can induce paranoid thinking. There is an
immediate risk of death secondary to cardiac arrest or from seizures followed
by respiratory arrest. In contrast to stimulants used to treat ADHD, such as
methylphenidate, cocaine quickly crosses the blood-brain barrier and moves
off the dopamine transporter within 20 minutes; methylphenidate remains
bound to dopamine for long periods.
Heroin
Heroin, a derivative of morphine, is produced from a poppy plant. Heroin
usually appears as a white or brown powder that users can snort, but more
commonly, they take it intravenously. Withdrawal symptoms include
restlessness, muscle and bone pain, insomnia, diarrhea and vomiting, cold
flashes with goosebumps, and kicking movements. Withdrawal occurs within
a few hours after use; symptoms peak between 48 and 72 hours later and
remit within about a week.
Club Drugs
Adolescents who frequent nightclubs, raves, bars, or music clubs also
frequently use MDMA, GHB, flunitrazepam (Rohypnol), and ketamine.
GHB, flunitrazepam (a benzodiazepine), and ketamine (an anesthetic) are




<<<PAGE 684>>>

adolescents. There have been accidental adolescent deaths due to MDMA.
Gamma-Hydroxybutyrate (GHB)
Gamma-hydroxybutyrate, a club drug, has been found in surveys to have an
annual prevalence rate of 1.1 percent for 8th graders, 1.0 percent for 10th
graders, and a 1.6 percent rate of use for 12th graders.
Ketamine
Ketamine, another club drug, was found recently to have a rate of 1.3 percent
annual prevalence for 8th graders, 2.1 percent for 10th graders, and 2.5
percent rate for 12th graders.
Flunitrazepam (Rohypnol)
Flunitrazepam (Rohypnol), a third club drug, has been found to have an
annual prevalence rate of about 1 percent for all high school grades
combined.
Anabolic Steroids
Despite reported knowledge of the risks of anabolic steroids among high
school students, surveys over the last 5 years found rates of anabolic steroid
use to be 1.6 percent among 8th graders and 2.1 percent among 10th graders.
Up to 45 percent of 10th and 12th graders reported knowledge of the risks of
anabolic steroids; however, over the last decade, it appears that high school
seniors reported less disapproval of their use.
Inhalants
The use of inhalants in the form of glue, aerosols, and gasoline is relatively
more common among younger than older adolescents. Among 8th-, 10th-,
and 12th-grade students, 17.6, 15.7, and 17.6 percent, respectively, report
using inhalants; 0.2 percent of 8th-grade students, 0.1 percent of 10th-grade
students, and 0.2 percent of 12th-grade students report daily use of inhalants.
Multiple Substance Use
Among adolescents enrolled in substance abuse treatment programs, 96




<<<PAGE 960>>>

4.5 Sedative-, Hypnotic-, or AnxiolyticRelated Disorders
Anxiolytic or sedative–hypnotic drugs are on a continuum with their hypnotic
or sleep-inducing effects. In addition to their psychiatric indications,
clinicians also use these drugs as antiepileptics, muscle relaxants, anesthetics,
and anesthetic adjuvants. Alcohol and all drugs of this class are crosstolerant, and their effects are additive. Physical and psychological
dependence develops to these drugs, and all are associated with withdrawal
symptoms. In the practice of psychiatry and addiction medicine, the drug
class that is most important clinically is the benzodiazepines.
The three major groups of drugs associated with this class of substancerelated disorders are benzodiazepines, barbiturates, and barbiturate-like
substances. We discuss each below.
Clinical Features
Specific Agents
BENZODIAZEPINES. Many benzodiazepines, differing primarily in their half-

lives, are available in the United States. Examples of benzodiazepines are
diazepam, flurazepam, oxazepam, and chlordiazepoxide. Benzodiazepines are
used primarily as anxiolytics, hypnotics, antiepileptics, and anesthetics, as
well as for alcohol withdrawal. After their introduction in the United States in
the 1960s, benzodiazepines rapidly became the most prescribed drugs; about
15 percent of all persons in the United States have had a benzodiazepine
prescribed by a physician. Increasing awareness of the risks for dependence
on benzodiazepines and increased regulatory requirements, however, have
decreased the number of benzodiazepine prescriptions. The DEA classifies all
benzodiazepines as Schedule IV controlled substances.
Flunitrazepam, a benzodiazepine used in Mexico, South America, and
Europe but not available in the United States, has become a drug of abuse.
When taken with alcohol, it may lead to promiscuous sexual behavior and
rape. It is illegal to bring flunitrazepam into the United States. Although




<<<PAGE 978>>>

unknown number of immigrants to the United States.
In the mid-2000s, synthetic cathinones began to appear, marketed as “legal
high” chemicals. They were packaged under labels including “screen
cleaner,” “jewelry cleaner,” and most notoriously “bath salts.” Produced as
powders (generally marked “not for human consumption”), users can ingest
them by oral, intranasal, inhaled (smoked) or intravenous routes. These
compounds are substituted cathinones that are chemically modified to avoid
regulatory control. There are a large number of specific compounds in the
class, and a given package often contains a mix of agents, further increasing
the risk of toxicity. Generally, substituted cathinones increase synaptic
catecholamine levels by inhibiting the dopamine, serotonin, and
norepinephrine reuptake transporters in a fashion similar to cocaine. Most
also facilitate catecholamine release, similar to methamphetamine. Animal
models indicate strong reinforcing properties of these compounds, suggesting
that they are highly addictive.
“Club Drugs”. Club drugs is a generic term for drugs associated with dance
clubs, bars, and all-night dance parties (raves). They include LSD, γhydroxybutyrate (GHB), ketamine, methamphetamine, MDMA (ecstasy), and
Rohypnol or “roofies” (flunitrazepam). These represent various classes of
drugs, with different chemical structures and a range of physical and
subjective effects. GHB, ketamine, and Rohypnol are sometimes called date
rape drugs because they produce disorienting and sedating effects, and often
users cannot recall what occurred during all or part of an episode under the
influence of the drug. These drugs may be given surreptitiously, such as
slipped into a beverage, or a person might be convinced to take the drug, not
understanding its effect.
Emergency department mentions of GHB, ketamine, and Rohypnol are
relatively few. Of the club drugs, methamphetamine is the substance that
accounts for the largest share of treatment admissions.

DIAGNOSIS
Stimulant Use Disorder
The DSM-5 and ICD-10 include several diagnoses related to stimulant use




<<<PAGE 1601>>>

the diagnostic approaches to RLS.
Table 15-15
Medications and Drugs Causing or Worsening Certain
Parasomnias
REM Sleep Behavior Disorder
Biperiden
Caffeine
Monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs)
Selegiline
Serotonin agonists
Tricyclic antidepressants
Venlafaxine
Withdrawal syndromes
Alcohol
Meprobamate
Pentazocine
Nitrazepam
Nightmares
Alcohol abuse or withdrawal
Drug-induced REM sleep rebound (e.g., withdrawal from REMsuppressing drugs such as methamphetamine)
l-DOPA
β-Blockers
A variety of medical conditions can cause secondary RLS, and we list
these in Table 15-17. A detailed history and physical examination are
essential parts of the RLS workup. Also, we should check a ferritin level in
every patient with symptoms consistent with RLS.
Periodic Limb Movement Disorder. Periodic limb movement disorder
(PLMD), previously called nocturnal myoclonus, involves brief, stereotypic,
repetitive, nonepileptiform movements of the limbs, usually the legs. It




<<<PAGE 1637>>>

melatonin levels begin to rise at dusk and remain elevated until dawn. Bright
light suppresses the release of melatonin. Melatonin, in a sense, is the signal
of darkness in the brain. As such, we can use it clinically to manage sighted
patients with disturbed sleep–wake cycles. Melatonin is available over the
counter in the United States. A prescription synthetic melatonin agonist
(ramelteon) is also available. Ramelteon is FDA approved for treating
patients with sleep-onset insomnia but is used off label for the entire
spectrum of circadian rhythm sleep disorders. Outside the United States, a
sustained-release prescription form of melatonin is available. Of interest, the
only medication approved for shift work sleep disorder is the wakepromoting compound modafinil. Modafinil treats sleepiness occurring during
night shift work.
Chronotherapy. Chronotherapy is one technique used to reset the biologic
clock. It involves progressively phase delaying a person until synchronizing
the circadian oscillator with the desired sleep–wake schedule. Most young
and middle-aged adults have a propensity to phase delay the circadian sleep–
wake rhythm progressively anyhow. Thus, phase delaying each night by 2 to
3 hours is simpler than phase advancing because it capitalizes on a natural
tendency. Halting the phase delay at the appropriate moment and maintaining
the desired synchrony can be a challenge. The patient also has to cope with
an odd sleep–wake schedule for the better part of a week during therapy
(which can interfere with school or work). For these reasons, the
development of light therapy and pharmacologic interventions has
overshadowed chronotherapy.
Parasomnias and Sleep-Related Movement Disorders
Nightmare Disorder. Treatment using behavioral techniques can be
helpful. Desensitization and exposure therapy, image rehearsal therapy, lucid
dream therapy, and cognitive therapy can help address nightmare disorder.
Additionally, evidence for the use of prazosin, a CNS α-1 receptor antagonist,
in the treatment of PTSD-related nightmares is growing. Nitrazepam and
triazolam may also be helpful.
Recurrent Isolated Sleep Paralysis. Improved sleep hygiene and




<<<PAGE 3656>>>

Flumazenil, 299, 679
Flunitrazepam, 215, 298
Fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH), 96
Fluorescent treponemal antibody absorption (FTA-ABS) test, 66
Fluoxetine, 594, 627–628, 631
for depression in adolescents, 178
Fluphenazine
for schizophrenia, 353t
for Tourette disorder, 160
Fluvoxamine, 627, 628, 631, 632
FMRI gene, 991
Folate levels, serum, 66
Folic acid deficiencies, 938
Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), hormone regulation by, 969
Fölling, Ivar Asbjörn, 102
Ford v. Wainwright, 843
Forensic and legal issues, 836–846
child abuse, 838
child custody, 842
civil liability, 845, 846t
civil rights of patients, 840
communication rights, 841
economic rights, 841
least restrictive alternative, 841
private rights, 841
visitation rights, 841
confidentiality, 837–838
criminal law, 843–845
competence to be executed, 843
competence to stand trial, 843
criminal responsibility, 843–845
guilty but mentally ill, 844f, 845
discussions about patients, 838
durable power of attorney, 843
emotional damage and distress, 845
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act, 846
high-risk clinical situations


