<<<PAGE 325>>>

some rejection and failure outside the family context. The parents may
benefit from continuous counseling or family therapy and should be allowed
opportunities to express their feelings of guilt, despair, anguish, recurring
denial, and anger about their child’s disorder and future. We should give the
parents all the necessary and current medical information regarding causes,
treatment, and other pertinent areas (e.g., specialized training and the
correction of sensory defects).
Social Intervention. One of the most prevalent problems among persons
with an intellectual disability is a sense of social isolation and social skills
deficits. Thus, improving the quantity and quality of social competence is a
critical part of their care. Special Olympics International is the most extensive
recreational sports program geared for this population. In addition to
providing a forum to develop physical fitness, Special Olympics also
enhances social interactions, friendships, and (hopefully) general self-esteem.
Psychopharmacologic Interventions
Pharmacologic approaches to the treatment of behavioral and psychological
symptoms in children with an intellectual disability follow the paradigms of
the evidence-based literature on treatment for all children with psychiatric
disorders. However, given the paucity of randomized trials in the childhood
intellectual disability population, an empirical approach must also be taken.
Treating Comorbid Disorders and Symptoms
Antipsychotic
medicine may be useful for reducing challenging behaviors. Among the
antipsychotics, both aripiprazole and risperidone had reasonable effect sizes
in multiple studies. However, we should view these findings cautiously as
many of the studies had significant methodologic limitations. Overall, the
consensus seems to be that antipsychotics are helpful in the short term.
Among them, aripiprazole and risperidone have the majority of studies and
show effect sizes in the moderate to large range. There is little evidence on
the long-term use of these medications. Given the significant side effects
(weight gain, sedation, cardiovascular risks, extrapyramidal side effects, and
increased prolactin levels, which are of particular concern in children), we
AGGRESSION, IRRITABILITY, AND SELF-INJURIOUS BEHAVIOR.




<<<PAGE 412>>>

It consists of seven interactive computer games that target changes in facial
expression, attention to the eye region of the face, holistic face recognition,
and identifying emotional expression. An RCT of this program with children
with autism spectrum disorder provided evidence that after 20 hours of face
training with Let’s Face It!, compared to the control group, the trained
children demonstrated improvement in their ability to focus on the eye region
of a face and improved their analytic and holistic face-processing skills.
Several studies using virtual reality environments to teach children with
autism spectrum disorder social skills and interaction have provided evidence
of their value. In one study, a virtual café for children with autism spectrum
disorder allowed the children to practice ordering and paying for drinks and
food by navigation with the use of a computer mouse.
Psychopharmacological Interventions
Psychopharmacological interventions in autism spectrum disorder help
ameliorate behavioral symptoms rather than core features of autism spectrum
disorder. Target symptoms include irritability, broadly including aggression,
temper tantrums, and self-injurious behaviors, hyperactivity, impulsivity, and
inattention.
Irritability. Two second-generation antipsychotics, risperidone, and
aripiprazole, have been approved by the Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) in the United States for treatment of irritability in individuals with
autism spectrum disorder. Risperidone, a high-potency antipsychotic with
combined dopamine (D2) and serotonin (5-HT2) receptor antagonist
properties, has been shown to subdue aggressive or self-injurious behaviors
in children with and without autism spectrum disorder. There have been
seven RCTs, three reanalysis studies, and two add-on studies, which have
converged to confirm risperidone as an efficacious pharmacologic treatment
for irritability in children and adolescents with autism spectrum disorder.
Typical doses range from 0.5 to 1.5 mg. Some of the preschoolers in this
study were also receiving intensive behavioral treatments. Risperidone is
considered the first-line of medication treatment for children and adolescents
with autism spectrum disorder who exhibit severe irritability. Despite its
efficacy, risperidone’s main side effects of weight gain and increased




<<<PAGE 413>>>

appetite, metabolic side effects such as hyperglycemia, prolactin elevation,
and dyslipidemia, along with other common adverse effects such as fatigue,
drowsiness, dizziness, and drooling, have limited its use in some individuals.
Risperidone should be used with caution in individuals with underlying
cardiac abnormalities or hypotension, since risperidone may contribute to
orthostatic hypotension. In further continuation studies of risperidone in the
treatment of irritability in autism spectrum disorder, persistent efficacy and
tolerability were found over 6 months, with a rapid return of symptoms in
good responders when discontinuing the risperidone. Other drugs studied in
the treatment of irritability in autism spectrum disorder include aripiprazole
and olanzapine.
Two extensive studies utilizing aripiprazole in the treatment of tantrums,
aggression, and self-injury in children and adolescents with autism spectrum
disorder found that aripiprazole was both efficacious and safe. Doses ranged
from 5 to 15 mg/day. The main side effects included sedation, dizziness,
insomnia, akathisia, nausea, and vomiting. Although weight gain was not as
pronounced as with risperidone, it was still considered a moderate adverse
event, with approximately 1.3 to 1.5 kg gained during an 8-week study
period. The weight gain was similar at the lower and higher doses.
Olanzapine, which blocks 5-HT2A and D2 receptors and also blocks
muscarinic receptors, has been studied in children and adolescents with
autism spectrum disorder for the treatment of irritability with a trend toward a
positive response; however, significant weight gain of approximately 3.5 kg
occurred. The main side effect was sedation.
Hyperactivity, Impulsivity, and Inattention. There have been several
randomized placebo-controlled trials of methylphenidate for the treatment of
hyperactivity, impulsivity, and inattention in children and adolescents with
autism spectrum disorder. The Research Units of Pediatric
Psychopharmacology found methylphenidate to be at least moderately
efficacious at doses of 0.25 to 0.5 mg/kg for youth with autism spectrum
disorder and ADHD symptoms. The efficacy of methylphenidate in this
population was less effective than in children with ADHD without autism
spectrum disorder, and children with autism spectrum disorder developed
more frequent side effects, including increased irritability, compared to
ADHD children. A study of methylphenidate in the treatment of hyperactivity




<<<PAGE 511>>>

affinity for dopamine D2 and serotonin 5-HT2 receptors, is the most wellstudied atypical antipsychotic in the treatment of tics. There is considerable
evidence for its efficacy. Multiple randomized, controlled studies in children
and adolescents have shown favorable results compared to placebo as well as
in head-to-head studies with the typical antipsychotics haloperidol and
pimozide. Risperidone was associated with fewer adverse events compared to
typical antipsychotics; however, it can cause weight gain, metabolic side
effects, and hyperprolactinemia. In a randomized, double-blind, parallelgroup study of Tourette disorder comparing risperidone to pimozide,
risperidone showed superiority in reducing comorbid obsessive-compulsive
symptoms as well as reducing tics. In other randomized clinical trials,
risperidone reduced tics in children, adolescents, and adults with mean daily
doses of 2.5 mg with a range of 1 to 6 mg.
Haloperidol and pimozide are the two most well-investigated and FDAapproved antipsychotic agents in the treatment of Tourette disorder.
However, atypical antipsychotics such as risperidone are often first-line
agents due to their safer side-effect profiles. Both haloperidol and pimozide
are efficacious in multiple randomized clinical trials in the treatment of
Tourette disorder. Both haloperidol and pimozide present significant risks for
extrapyramidal side effects; in a long-term naturalistic follow-up study,
haloperidol produces more significant acute dyskinesia and dystonia
compared to pimozide.
A third typical antipsychotic, fluphenazine, has been used in the United
States for many years in the treatment of tic disorders in the absence of robust
data supporting its efficacy. A small controlled study of fluphenazine,
trifluphenazine, and haloperidol found similar reductions in tics; however,
haloperidol has more extrapyramidal side effects and more sedation. The
frequency of sedation, dystonia, and akathisia of typical antipsychotics,
probably due to their predominant dopaminergic blockade in the nigrostriatal
pathways, limits their use and increases the appeal of the atypical
antipsychotics. Risperidone and pimozide had equal efficacy in one study of
children, adolescents, and adults with Tourette disorder.
Aripiprazole has become a pharmacologic agent of interest in the treatment
of tic disorders due to its mode of action; in addition to its D2 receptor
antagonistic actions, aripiprazole is also a partial D2 and 5-HT1A receptor




<<<PAGE 512>>>

agonist and a 5-HT2A antagonist. A multisite double-blind controlled study of
aripiprazole in children with Tourette disorder in China found a reduction in
tic behaviors in about 60 percent of the aripiprazole group compared to about
64 percent reduction in a group treated with tiapride, a benzamide with
selective D2 receptor antagonism. There was no significant difference
between the two groups. Although sedation and sleep disturbance are
common side effects with aripiprazole, weight gain is less pronounced than
with risperidone.
Olanzapine and ziprasidone are also efficacious in the treatment of tic
disorders in at least one RCT. Sedation and weight gain were prominent side
effects with olanzapine, and potential QT prolongation was an issue with
ziprasidone. Quetiapine is a potentially useful agent in the treatment of tics,
with its higher affinity for 5-HT2 receptors than for D2 receptors. However,
randomized clinical trials are needed. Clozapine, contrary to many other
atypical antipsychotics, is not useful in the treatment of tics.
NORADRENERGIC AGENTS.

Noradrenergic agents, including clonidine and
guanfacine, as well as atomoxetine, are frequently used in children as primary
treatments or adjunctive treatments for comorbid ADHD and tics. Several
studies have provided some evidence for the efficacy of clonidine, an α2adrenergic agent, in the treatment of tics in children, adolescents, and adults
with tic disorders. The largest randomized trial with oral clonidine compared
to placebo found a modest reduction in tics with clonidine. A multisite
randomized, double-blind placebo-controlled trial using the clonidine patch
in the treatment of tic disorders in children found a significant improvement
in tic symptoms (about 69 percent) compared to about 47 percent of the
children in the control group. The usual dose range for clonidine is from 0.05
mg orally three times daily to 0.1 mg four times daily, and for guanfacine, it
is from 1 to 4 mg/day. When used in these dosage ranges, adverse effects of
the α-adrenergic agents may include drowsiness, headache, irritability, and
occasional hypotension.
Guanfacine can treat children with ADHD successfully, although its
efficacy regarding reducing tics is controversial. In one randomized clinical
trial treating 34 children with ADHD and tics, guanfacine was superior to
placebo in the reduction of tics. In another double-blind placebo-controlled




<<<PAGE 552>>>

controlled study of sertraline to prevent PTSD found that children who
received sertraline, flexibly dosed between 25 and 150 mg/day, had a
decrease in parent-reported symptoms of PTSD over 8 weeks compared to a
placebo group. Among the child-reported symptoms, however, there was no
significant difference between the two groups.
Psychiatrists sometimes use antiadrenergic agents to treat dysregulation of
the noradrenergic system in adults and youth with PTSD. α2-Agonists such as
clonidine and guanfacine, for example, have been used to decrease
norepinephrine release, whereas centrally acting β-antagonists such as
propranolol, and α1-antagonists such as prazosin, are hypothesized to
improve hyperarousal and intrusive thoughts through attenuation of
norepinephrine postsynaptically. Although there are some data in adults with
PTSD to support the use of these agents, there are mainly case reports for
youths. There is a suggestion that guanfacine may reduce nightmares in
children with PTSD and that clonidine may diminish symptoms of
reenactment of traumatic events in children. One report of propranolol
treatment in 11 pediatric patients with PTSD from sexual or physical abuse
with a mean age of 8.5 years, who exhibited agitation and hyperarousal,
indicated some decrease in symptoms in 8 of the 11 children studied. Another
open study of transdermal clonidine treatment of preschoolers with PTSD
suggests that clonidine may be efficacious in this population in decreasing
activation and hyperarousal. An additional open trial of oral clonidine with
dosage ranges of 0.05 to 0.1 mg twice daily similarly suggests that this
medication may provide some relief for the symptoms of hyperarousal,
impulsivity, and agitation in young children with PTSD.
Second-generation antipsychotics such as risperidone, olanzapine,
quetiapine, ziprasidone, and aripiprazole have been studied in adults with
PTSD with mixed results. Risperidone and aripiprazole both have FDA
approval for use in children and adolescents with aggression, severe
behavioral dyscontrol, and severe psychiatric disorders; however, there are no
controlled trials with children with PTSD. For example, there is one case
series of three preschool-age children who exhibited symptoms of acute
stress disorder and who had severe thermal burns improved after being
treated with risperidone.
In children and adolescents with PTSD, there is one open-label trial of




<<<PAGE 654>>>

nausea, agitation, tremor, and fatigue. Dosage ranges for the various SSRIs
found to have efficacy in randomized clinical trials are the following:
fluoxetine (20 to 60 mg), sertraline (50 to 200 mg), fluvoxamine (up to 200
mg), and paroxetine (up to 50 mg).
Clomipramine was the first antidepressant studied in the treatment of OCD
in childhood and the only tricyclic antidepressant that has FDA approval for
the treatment of anxiety disorders in childhood. Clomipramine was
efficacious in doses up to 200 mg, or 3 mg/kg, whichever is less.
Nevertheless, clomipramine is not recommended as a first-line treatment due
to its higher potential risks compared to other SSRIs, including the
cardiovascular risk of hypotension and arrhythmia and seizure risk.
Pediatric patients with OCD who respond only partially to medications
tend to have at least moderate to severe OCD symptoms, high ratings of
global impairment, and significant comorbidity even after their partial
response to an adequate trial of medication. Augmentation strategies with
medications to enhance serotonergic effects, such as with atypical
antipsychotics (e.g., risperidone), have demonstrated increased response
when SSRIs yield a partial response. Aripiprazole augmentation in 39
adolescents with OCD who did not respond to two trials of monotherapy with
SSRIs led to 59 percent of patients being rated as improved or very much
improved. Patients who responded to aripiprazole were less impaired at
baseline in functional impairment but not in the clinical severity of their
OCD. Aripiprazole’s final mean dose was 12.2 mg/day. This agent may be
useful for pediatric OCD and warrants further controlled trials.
Given the lack of data on discontinuation, recommendations for
maintaining medication such as stabilization, education about relapse risk,
and tapering medication during the summer are likely in order to minimize
academic compromise in case of relapse. For children and adolescents with
more severe or multiple episodes of significant exacerbation of symptoms,
treatment for more than a year is recommended. Overall, the efficacy of
treatment for children and adolescents with OCD is high with choices of
SSRIs and CBT.

EPIDEMIOLOGY
OCD is common among children and adolescents, with a point prevalence of




<<<PAGE 661>>>

Ian was sent by ambulance to the hospital for the first time from school
when he tried to jump off a balcony on the second story of his school in
response to auditory hallucinations commanding him to kill himself.
During his hospitalization, his parents reluctantly consented to a
risperidone trial. The psychiatrist titrated Ian to 3 mg/day. His auditory
hallucinations improved moderately after 2 weeks of treatment. However,
he continued to be suspicious and mistrustful of his physicians and
family.
Ian’s family was perplexed as to what had caused Ian’s severe
symptoms, and the hospital treatment team met with his parents multiple
times during his hospitalization to reassure them that they had not caused
his illness and that their continued support might improve his chances of
improvement. After discharge from the hospital 30 days later, Ian was
placed in a special education program in a nonpublic school, and he was
assigned a psychotherapist who met regularly with him individually and
with his family. At the time of discharge from the hospital, Ian’s
symptoms had moderately improved, although he still had auditory
hallucinations intermittently. Over the next 5 years after the onset of his
illness, Ian had many exacerbations of his psychosis, and he was
hospitalized nine times, including placement in a long-term residential
program. Ian had received trials of olanzapine, quetiapine, and
aripiprazole, each of which seemed to lead to improvement for a while,
after which he was no longer responsive to the medications. Ian
continued to receive individual cognitive-behavioral therapy and family
therapy, and his family was very supportive. Even with these
interventions, Ian’s mental status continued to display tangential and
disorganized thinking, paranoid delusions, loose associations,
perseverative speech patterns, and a flat, at times, inappropriate affect. He
had periods in which he resorted to pacing and muttering to himself, with
no social interaction with others unless initiated by adults. Finally, Ian
achieved significant improvement after being placed on clozapine
therapy, although he remained mildly symptomatic. (Adapted from a case
by Jon M. McClellan, M.D.)
Pathology and Laboratory Examinations




<<<PAGE 665>>>

social skills deficits, attention deficits, and academic difficulties that often
accompany childhood-onset schizophrenia.
Pharmacotherapy
Second-generation antipsychotics, serotonin-dopamine antagonists, are the
current mainstay pharmacologic treatments for children and adolescents with
schizophrenia. Current data include six randomized clinical trials in youth
investigating the efficacy of second-generation antipsychotics for early-onset
schizophrenia, with limited support for one agent over the others. Although
clozapine, a serotonin receptor antagonist with some dopamine (D2)
antagonism, may be more effective in reducing positive and negative
symptoms, it remains a choice of last resort in youth based on its side effects.
To date, however, evidence from multisite randomized clinical trials supports
some efficacy of risperidone, olanzapine, aripiprazole, and clozapine in the
treatment of childhood- and adolescent-onset schizophrenia. Two randomized
clinical trials using risperidone in adolescents with schizophrenia found
risperidone at doses up to 3 mg/day to be superior to placebo. A multisite
randomized 6-week controlled trial of olanzapine in adolescents with
schizophrenia found that it was more efficacious than a placebo. An RCT of
aripiprazole at two fixed doses found that it was superior to placebo in the
treatment of positive symptoms of adolescent schizophrenia; however, more
than 40 percent of subjects in the active medication group did not achieve
remission. Finally, clozapine is more effective than haloperidol in improving
both positive and negative symptoms in treatment-resistant schizophrenia in
youth. More recently, a study compared clozapine to high doses of
olanzapine and found that response rates were about twice as high for
clozapine as olanzapine (66 percent vs. 33 percent) when the investigators
defined response as 30 percent or better reduction in symptoms on the Brief
Psychiatric Rating Scale and improvement on the Clinical Global Impression
Scale. The Treatment of Early-Onset Schizophrenia Spectrum Disorders
Study compared the efficacy of risperidone and olanzapine with those of
molindone, a mid-potency first-generation antipsychotic. In this study,
lacking a placebo group, each of these agents provided a similar therapeutic
effect; however, fewer than half of the patients responded optimally. Despite
the limited randomized controlled studies of second-generation




<<<PAGE 1201>>>

skin rash. Evidence for valproate and other anticonvulsants is limited.
Gabapentin and levetiracetam appear to be ineffective.
Antipsychotics. Several of the atypical antipsychotics have shown efficacy
for bipolar depression. Quetiapine has the best evidence. It appears that
quetiapine, in a modest dose (300 mg/day), is sufficient to improve
symptoms. Olanzapine, lurasidone, and cariprazine also have positive studies,
and the FDA approved lurasidone for this indication. Ziprasidone and
aripiprazole do not appear to be effective.
Antidepressants. It remains controversial whether antidepressants are useful
for the depressive phase of bipolar disorder. This is particularly true in
patients with rapid cycling and mixed states. They seem to be less effective
than for major depressive disorder and may induce cycling, mania, or
hypomania. The risk of inducing mania seems highest for tricyclic
antidepressants, monoamine oxidase inhibitors, and perhaps the serotonin
norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors such as venlafaxine. Most experts agree
that antidepressants are not appropriate as monotherapy for patients with
bipolar disorder.
Whether we can use them as adjuncts is also controversial. Some
antidepressants have some evidence of efficacy for adjunctive therapy, such
as fluoxetine. On the whole, the available evidence suggests they may have
some usefulness when combined with a mood stabilizer.




<<<PAGE 1254>>>

to pick a medication in a different class. For example, we might switch from
an SSRI to an SNRI. However, when putting these assumptions to the test, it
is difficult to find any advantage for any particular strategy. For example, in
the landmark STAR*D study, which remains one of the most extensive
studies of treatment strategies following initial failure, although medication
switches were modestly helpful, both switches within and outside a class
were equally effective.
Among augmentation options, several approaches have reasonable
evidence. Several antipsychotics, most notably quetiapine and aripiprazole,
are effective for augmentation. Lithium augmentation is also effective for
augmenting both SSRIs and TCAs. There are also positive studies of thyroid
hormone. However, this strategy is rarely used in clinical practice owing to
the need for ongoing monitoring and potential adverse effects. Several other
agents have been studied, including bupropion, buspirone, lamotrigine,
methylphenidate, and pindolol; however, these have limited placebocontrolled data. One meta-analysis of the available data on switching
strategies concluded that quetiapine and aripiprazole have the best evidence
as augmentation agents. However, we should use these cautiously given their
side effect profile.
NOVEL PHARMACOLOGIC AGENTS

Ketamine. The anesthetic agent ketamine is effective in treatment-resistant
depression. It has a mechanism of action that inhibits the postsynaptic
glutamate-binding protein N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor. Because
abnormalities in glutamatergic signaling seem to have a role in major
depressive disorder, this may account for its efficacy. Until recently,
ketamine was only available intravenously, limiting its use as we had to
monitor patients while they received an infusion of the drug over 30 minutes
in a clinical setting. The most common side effects are dizziness, headache,
and poor coordination, which are transitory. Dissociative symptoms,
including hallucinations, may also occur. A positive response is usually seen
within 24 hours, making this a genuinely novel substance in that it appears to
act much more rapidly than standard antidepressants. However, the effect
seems to be short-lived, and wears off after between 2 and 7 days, again
limiting its use. There are little data on longer-term treatment as well as
concern over associated adverse effects, particularly the psychogenic effect.




<<<PAGE 1356>>>

TREATMENT
Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder
Pharmacotherapy. Effective medications include clomipramine and
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs, which, along with
clomipramine and other serotonergic medications, are sometimes called
serotonin reuptake inhibitor [SRIs]). Head-to-head comparisons of
clomipramine and SSRIs show equal efficacy but better tolerability of the
SSRIs. In general, clinicians must use higher doses to achieve an optimal
effect. Examples are doses of 80 mg of fluoxetine or 200 mg of sertraline.
Some patients respond to even higher doses. Exceeding the recommended
doses is not, however, advisable for clomipramine or citalopram, due to
safety concerns. There is also some evidence that response to SRIs is slower
in OCD than in depression; clinicians are therefore encouraged to prescribe
an SRI for at least 12 weeks before deciding to switch agents or augment
with another psychotropic. A general rule of thumb is that we should
continue to use the dose that was required to obtain a response for at least 1
to 2 years. When discontinuing medication, there is a real risk of relapse, so
this should be done very gradually, with small adjustments made every few
months.
Patients who fail to respond to one SRI may respond to another.
The most extensive evidence base is for antipsychotics in adult OCD.
Among those, risperidone and aripiprazole are best supported as adjuncts.
Some studies have indicated that these are particularly useful in patients with
tics, but not all data are consistent. When a response to these agents occurs, it
typically happens relatively quickly (e.g., 4 weeks). When using dopamine
receptor blockers, it is crucial to monitor adverse events.
Memantine, riluzole, ketamine, lamotrigine, and N-acetylcysteine (NAC)
are other promising augmentation agents.
Psychotherapy. There is a long history of understanding OCD symptoms
from a psychodynamic perspective, but there is no rigorous evidence that a
psychodynamic approach is useful in the treatment of OCD. Instead,
empirical research on the psychotherapy of OCD has emerged from
behavioral and cognitive perspectives. Exposure and response prevention




<<<PAGE 1434>>>

medication response is likely to be partial, devising the best “shock-absorber”
system for the patient at a given time. In general, success is more likely if the
target symptoms are present across most or all personality states, rather than
confined to one or a few. Because rapid symptom oscillations are
characteristic in this population, it is not advisable to chase each symptom
shift with a medication change.
The most robust medication treatment effect in this patient population is
the response of nightmares to the α1-adrenergic antagonist prazosin. If the
patient tolerates the blood pressure effects, dosages of prazosin as high as 25
mg daily, in single or twice-daily doses, can be useful. Daytime dosing may
also be effective for control of flashbacks and intrusive symptoms.
Doxazosin, a longer-acting α1-adrenergic antagonist, may also help with
nightmares and intrusive symptoms in PTSD.
Antidepressant medications can reduce depression and stabilize mood. A
variety of PTSD symptoms, especially intrusive and hyperarousal symptoms,
are partially medication responsive. Clinicians report some success with
SSRI, tricyclic, and monoamine oxidase (MAO) antidepressants, β-blockers,
clonidine, anticonvulsants, and benzodiazepines in reducing intrusive
symptoms, hyperarousal, and anxiety in patients with a dissociative identity
disorder. Patients with obsessive-compulsive symptoms may respond to
serotonergic antidepressants. Emerging data suggest that naltrexone may help
ameliorate recurrent self-injurious behaviors in a subset of traumatized
patients.
The atypical neuroleptics, such as risperidone, quetiapine, ziprasidone,
aripiprazole, and olanzapine, may be more effective and better tolerated than
typical neuroleptics for overwhelming anxiety and intrusive PTSD symptoms
in patients with dissociative identity disorder. However, weight gain and
metabolic syndrome may be a particularly problematic side effect for these
nonpsychotic patients. Occasionally, an extremely disorganized,
overwhelmed, chronically ill patient with dissociative identity disorder, who
has not responded to trials of other neuroleptics, responds favorably to a trial
of clozapine.
Electroconvulsive Therapy. For some patients, ECT helps to ameliorate
refractory mood disorders and does not worsen dissociative memory




<<<PAGE 1816>>>

(riluzole,
memantine)
Acute and severe

Mirtazapine, Novel
Psychotropics
(quetiapine,
aripiprazole,
clozapine), TCAs,
clonazepam,
valproates, lithium

Depression
Atypical
MAOIs, SSRIs,
depression/dysphoria
SNRIs,
Classical depression
Aripiprazole,
Lurasidone,
ziprasidone,
quetiapine,
Atypical
antipsychotics (as
monotherapy or
augmentation)

TCAs

Emotional lability/rapid Lithium, Lamotrigine,
cycling
Valproate, Lowerdose
antipsychotics
(olanzapine,
aripiprazole,
clozapine,
ziprasidone)

TCAs
(“catecholamine
stress”),
Standard
antidepressants
(risk of switching
to mania)

II. Behavior Dyscontrol
Aggression/impulsivity
Affective aggression
Lithium, SSRIs,
“Hot temper” with normal
Anticonvulsants,

Benzodiazepines
(disinhibition)




<<<PAGE 1929>>>

risk (1.6 to 1.7 times) of death compared with placebo. All of these agents are
considered first-line drugs for schizophrenia except clozapine, which may
cause adverse hematologic effects that require weekly blood sampling.
Schizophrenia and Schizoaffective Disorder. The SDAs are useful for
treating acute and chronic psychoses such as schizophrenia and
schizoaffective disorder, in both adults and adolescents. SDAs are as good as
or better than typical antipsychotics (DRAs) for the treatment of positive
symptoms in schizophrenia and superior to DRAs for the treatment of
negative symptoms. Compared with persons treated with DRAs, persons
treated with SDAs have fewer relapses and require less frequent
hospitalization, fewer emergency department visits, less phone contact with
mental health professionals, and less treatment in day programs.
Because clozapine has potentially life-threatening adverse effects, it is
appropriate only for patients with schizophrenia who are resistant to all other
antipsychotics. Other indications for clozapine include treatment of persons
with severe tardive dyskinesia—which can be reversed with high dosages in
some cases—and those with a low threshold for EPS. Persons who tolerate
clozapine have done well on long-term therapy. The effectiveness of
clozapine may be increased by augmentation with risperidone, which raises
clozapine concentrations and sometimes results in dramatic clinical
improvement.
Mood Disorders. Most of the SDAs (clozapine being a notable exception)
are FDA approved for the treatment of acute mania. Some of these agents,
including aripiprazole, olanzapine, quetiapine, and quetiapine XR, are also
approved for the maintenance treatment in bipolar disorder as monotherapy
or adjunctive therapy. The SDAs improve depressive symptoms in
schizophrenia, and both clinical experience and clinical trials show that all of
the SDAs augment antidepressants in the acute management of major
depression. At this time, olanzapine, in combination with fluoxetine, has been
approved for treatment-resistant depression, and aripiprazole and quetiapine
XR are indicated for adjunctive therapy to antidepressants in MDDs.
Quetiapine and quetiapine XR are also approved in bipolar depression. A
fixed combination of olanzapine and fluoxetine (Symbyax) is approved as a
treatment for acute bipolar depression.




<<<PAGE 1939>>>

Side Effects. Somnolence, headache, dizziness, nausea, and
lightheadedness are the most common adverse effects in patients taking
ziprasidone. The drug has almost no significant effects outside the CNS, is
associated with almost no weight gain, and does not cause sustained prolactin
elevation. Concerns about prolongation of the QTc complex have deterred
some clinicians from using ziprasidone as a first choice. The QTc interval has
been shown to increase in patients treated with 40 and 120 mg/day.
Ziprasidone is contraindicated in combination with other drugs known to
prolong the QTc interval. These include, but are not limited to, dofetilide,
sotalol, quinidine, other class IA and III antiarrhythmics, mesoridazine,
thioridazine,
chlorpromazine,
droperidol,
pimozide,
sparfloxacin,
gatifloxacin, moxifloxacin, halofantrine, mefloquine, pentamidine, arsenic
trioxide, levomethadyl acetate, dolasetron mesylate, probucol, and
tacrolimus. Ziprasidone should be avoided in patients with congenital long
QT syndrome and patients with a history of cardiac arrhythmias.
Aripiprazole (Abilify)
Aripiprazole is a potent 5-HT2A antagonist and is indicated for the treatment
of both schizophrenia and acute mania. It is also approved for the
augmentation of antidepressant agents in MDD. Aripiprazole is a D2
antagonist, but can also act as a partial D2 agonist. Partial D2 agonists
compete at D2 receptors for endogenous dopamine, thereby producing a
functional reduction of dopamine activity.
Indications. Aripiprazole is indicated for the treatment of schizophrenia.
Short-term, 4- to 6-week studies comparing aripiprazole with haloperidol and
risperidone in patients with schizophrenia and schizoaffective disorder have
shown comparable efficacy. Dosages of 15, 20, and 30 mg a day were found
to be effective. Long-term studies suggest that aripiprazole is effective as a
maintenance treatment at a daily dose of 15 to 30 mg.
Aripiprazole is also indicated for the acute and maintenance treatment of
manic and mixed episodes associated with bipolar I disorder. It is also used
as adjunctive therapy to either lithium or valproate for the acute treatment of
manic and mixed episodes associated with bipolar I disorder.
Aripiprazole is indicated for use as adjunctive therapy to antidepressants




<<<PAGE 1940>>>

for the treatment of MDD. Aripiprazole is also indicated for the treatment of
irritability associated with autistic disorder.
Pharmacology. Aripiprazole is well absorbed, reaching peak plasma
concentrations after 3 to 5 hours. Absorption is not affected by food. The
mean elimination half-life of aripiprazole is about 75 hours. It has a weakly
active metabolite with a half-life of 96 hours. These relatively long half-lives
make aripiprazole suitable for once-daily dosing. Clearance is reduced in
elderly persons. Aripiprazole exhibits linear pharmacokinetics and is
primarily metabolized by CYP3A4 and CYP2D6 enzymes. It is 99 percent
protein-bound. Aripiprazole is excreted in breast milk in lactating rats.
Mechanistically, aripiprazole acts as a modulator, rather than a blocker,
and acts on both postsynaptic D2 receptors and presynaptic autoreceptors. In
theory, this mechanism addresses excessive limbic dopamine
(hyperdopaminergic) activity and decreased dopamine (hypodopaminergic)
activity in frontal and prefrontal areas—abnormalities that are thought to be
present in schizophrenia. The absence of a complete D2 blockade in the
striatal areas would be expected to minimize EPS. Aripiprazole is an α1adrenergic receptor antagonist, which may cause some patients to experience
orthostatic hypotension. Similar to the so-called atypical antipsychotic
agents, aripiprazole is a 5-HT2A antagonist.
Other Uses. A study of aggressive children and adolescents with
oppositional defiant disorder or conduct disorder found that there was a
positive response in about 60 percent of the subjects. In this study, vomiting
and somnolence led to a reduction in initial aripiprazole dosage.
Drug Interactions. Whereas carbamazepine and valproate reduce serum
concentrations, ketoconazole, fluoxetine, paroxetine, and quinidine increase
aripiprazole serum concentrations. Lithium and valproic acid, two drugs
likely to be combined with aripiprazole when treating bipolar disorder, do not
affect the steady-state concentrations of aripiprazole. Combined use with
antihypertensives may cause hypotension. Drugs that inhibit CYP2D6
activity reduce aripiprazole elimination.
Dosage and Clinical Guidelines. Aripiprazole is available as 5-, 10-, 15-




<<<PAGE 1941>>>

, 20-, and 30-mg tablets. The effective dosage range is 10 to 30 mg/day.
Although the starting dosage is 10 to 15 mg/day, problems with nausea,
insomnia, and akathisia have led to the use of lower than recommended
starting dosages of aripiprazole. Many clinicians find that an initial dose of 5
mg increases tolerability.
Side Effects. The most commonly reported side effects of aripiprazole are
headache, somnolence, agitation, dyspepsia, anxiety, and nausea. Although it
is not a frequent cause of EPS, aripiprazole does cause akathisia-like
activation. Described as restlessness or agitation, it can be highly distressing
and often leads to discontinuation of the medication. Insomnia is another
common complaint. Data so far do not indicate that weight gain or diabetes
mellitus have an increased incidence with aripiprazole. Prolactin elevation
does not typically occur. Aripiprazole does not cause significant QTc interval
changes. There have been reports of seizures.
Asenapine (Saphris)
Indications. Asenapine is approved for the acute treatment of adults with
schizophrenia and acute treatment of manic or mixed episodes associated
with bipolar I disorder with or without psychotic features in adults.
Pharmacology. Asenapine has an affinity for several receptors, including
serotonin (5-HT2A and 5-HT2C), noradrenergic (α2, and α1), dopaminergic
(D3 and D4 receptors is higher than its affinity for D2 receptors), and
histamine (H1). It has a negligible affinity for muscarinic-1 cholinergic
receptors and hence less incidence of dry mouth, blurred vision, constipation,
and urinary retention. The bioavailability is 35 percent via the sublingual
(preferred) route, and it achieves peak plasma concentration in 1 hour.
Asenapine is metabolized through glucuronidation and oxidative metabolism
by CYP1A2, so coadministration with fluvoxamine and other CYP1A2
inhibitors should be done cautiously.
Dosage. Asenapine is available as 5- and 10-mg sublingual tablets and
should be placed under the tongue. This method is because the bioavailability
of asenapine is less than 2 percent when swallowed, but is 35 percent when




<<<PAGE 3137>>>

Benzodiazepines Increased beta activity
Clozapine
(Clozaril)

Nonspecific change

Olanzapine
(Zyprexa)

Nonspecific change

Risperidone
(Risperdal)

Nonspecific change

Quetiapine
(Seroquel)

No significant changes

Aripiprazole
(Abilify)

No significant changes

Lithium

Slowing or paroxysmal activity

Alcohol

Decreased alpha activity; increased theta activity

Opioids

Decreased alpha activity; increased voltage of
theta and delta waves; in overdose, slow waves

Barbiturates

Increased beta activity; in withdrawal states,
generalized paroxysmal activity and spike
discharges

Marijuana

Increased alpha activity in frontal area of brain;
overall slow alpha activity

Cocaine

Similar to marijuana

Inhalants

Diffuse slowing of delta and theta waves

Nicotine

Increased alpha activity; in withdrawal, marked
decrease in alpha activity

Caffeine

In withdrawal, increase in amplitude or voltage of
theta activity

Topographic Quantitative Electroencephalography (QEEG)




<<<PAGE 3738>>>

Seasonality, 1003–1004
Seclusion and restraint, 841
indications and contraindications for, 841t
restrictions for, 841t
Secobarbital, 298
Secondary autonomous ego functions, 1065
Secondary prevention, 868
Secondary revision, 1059
Second-generation antidepressants, 591
Second-generation or atypical antipsychotic (SGA) drugs, 594, 608
adverse effects, 609
aripiprazole (Abilify), 612–613
asenapine (Saphris), 613
clinical guidelines, 615
clozapine (Clozaril), 613–614
dosing, 616t
drugs approved by FDA, 608
lumateperone (Caplyta), 615
lurasidone (Latuda), 614–615
mechanisms of action, 608–609
for mood disorders, 609
olanzapine (Zyprexa), 610–611
paliperidone (Invega), 610
quetiapine (Seroquel), 611–612
risk of extrapyramidal side effects (EPS), 608
risperidone (Risperdal), 609–610
for schizophrenia and schizoaffective disorder, 609
therapeutic indications, 609
ziprasidone (Geodon), 612
Second individuation, 906
Sedating drugs, 602
Sedative-, hypnotic-, anxiolytic-related disorders, 298–302
abuse, patterns of
intravenous use, 299
oral use, 298–299
clinical features
barbiturate-like substances, 298


