<<<PAGE 750>>>

Risperidone

0.5–1 mg a EPS concerns
day

Limited data in
delirium

Olanzapine

5–10 mg a
day

Higher mortality
in dementia
patients

Quetiapine

25–150 mg More sedating
a day

Metabolic
syndrome

Benzodiazepine
Lorazepam

0.5–3 mg a Respiratory
day and
depression,
as
paradoxical
needed
agitation
every 4
hr

Best use in
delirium
secondary to
alcohol or
benzodiazepine
withdrawal
Can worsen other
types of
delirium

EPIDEMIOLOGY
Delirium is a common disorder, with most incidence and prevalence rates
reported in elderly adults. In community studies, 1 percent of elderly persons
age 55 years or older have delirium (13 percent in the age 85 years and older
group in the community). Among elderly emergency department patients, 5
to 10 percent have delirium. At the time of admission to medical wards,
between 15 and 21 percent of older patients meet the criteria for deliriumprevalent cases. Of patients free of delirium at the time of hospital admission,
5 to 30 percent reported subsequent incidences of delirium during
hospitalization. Delirium occurs in 10 to 15 percent of general surgical
patients, 30 percent of open-heart surgery patients, and more than 50 percent
of patients treated for hip fractures. Delirium occurs in 70 to 87 percent of
intensive care unit patients and up to 83 percent of all patients receiving end
of life care. Sixty percent of patients in nursing homes or post-acute care




<<<PAGE 908>>>

Seizures. Seizures can occur suddenly and without other signs of
withdrawal. About 1 percent of patients may have a single grand mal
convulsion; the rare person has multiple fits, with the peak incidence on the
second day of withdrawal.
Such patients require neurologic evaluation to rule out an independent
seizure disorder. Assuming no other cause for the seizures is found,
benzodiazepines are the treatment of choice for managing alcohol-related
seizures. Anticonvulsants, although often used (particularly before the cause
of the seizure is known), do not appear to offer additional benefit.
Mild or Moderate Withdrawal. Withdrawal develops because the brain
has physically adapted to the presence of a brain depressant and cannot
function adequately in the absence of the drug. Giving sufficient brain
depressant on the first day to diminish symptoms and then weaning the
patient off the drug over the next 5 days offers most patients optimal relief. It
also minimizes the possibility that severe withdrawal will develop. Any CNS
depressant (including benzodiazepines, barbiturates, or even alcohol) can
work, but most clinicians choose a benzodiazepine for its relative safety.
Many studies have found that benzodiazepines control most of the symptoms
associated with alcohol withdrawal. We can give adequate treatment with
either short-acting drugs (e.g., lorazepam), or long-acting substances (e.g.,
chlordiazepoxide and diazepam). We may choose to give benzodiazepines
orally or parenterally; however, we should not give intramuscular (IM)
diazepam or chlordiazepoxide as their IM absorption is erratic. We should
titrate the dosage of the benzodiazepine, starting with a high dosage and
lowering the dosage as the patient recovers. We should aim to give sufficient
benzodiazepines to keep patients calm and sedated but not so sedated that we
cannot arouse them for procedures and examinations.
Although benzodiazepines are the standard treatment for alcohol
withdrawal, studies have shown that carbamazepine in daily doses of 800 mg
is as effective as benzodiazepines and has the added benefit of minimal abuse
liability. Carbamazepine use is gradually becoming common in the United
States and Europe.
Table 4-12 gives an example of withdrawal treatment using
chlordiazepoxide. When giving a long-acting agent, such as
chlordiazepoxide, the clinician must avoid producing excessive sleepiness




<<<PAGE 909>>>

through overmedication; if the patient is sleepy, it is best to omit the next
scheduled dose. When taking a short-acting drug, such as lorazepam, the
patient must not miss any dose because rapid changes in benzodiazepine
concentrations in the blood can precipitate severe withdrawal.
A social model program of detoxification saves money by avoiding
medications while using social supports. This less-expensive regimen can be
helpful for mild or moderate withdrawal syndromes. Some clinicians also use
β-adrenergic receptor antagonists (e.g., propranolol) or α-adrenergic receptor
agonists (e.g., clonidine) to block the symptoms of sympathetic hyperactivity.
However, these medications do not appear to be superior to benzodiazepines.
Unlike the brain depressants, these other agents are not effective treatments
for seizures or delirium.
Table 4-12
An Example Treatment for Alcohol Withdrawal
Day 1: chlordiazepoxide 25 mg by mouth 3–4 times daily, hold if
sedated
1–2 additional doses if
The patient is jittery
Has increased tremor
Has autonomic dysfunction
Day 2: give the total dose used on day 1 minus 20% divided across
3–4 doses
Following days: continue a 20% decrease until no further medication
is needed (4–5 days)
Severe Withdrawal. For the approximately 1 percent of alcoholic patients
with extreme autonomic dysfunction, agitation, and confusion—that is, those
with alcohol withdrawal delirium, or DTs—no optimal treatment has yet been
developed. The best treatment for DTs is prevention. When that is not
possible, the first step is to ask why such a severe and relatively uncommon
withdrawal syndrome has occurred. The answer often relates to a severe
concomitant medical problem that needs immediate treatment.
Once a delirium appears, the treatment remains similar to that for the
standard withdrawal but with higher doses. Example regimens are 50 to 100




<<<PAGE 910>>>

mg of chlordiazepoxide given every 4 hours orally, or lorazepam, given
intravenously (IV) if oral medication is not possible. A high-calorie, highcarbohydrate diet supplemented by multivitamins is also essential.
Physically restraining patients with the DTs is risky; they may fight against
the restraints to a dangerous level of exhaustion. When patients are disorderly
and uncontrollable, it may be preferable to use a seclusion room. Adjunctive
antipsychotic medications, such as haloperidol, are sometimes used to control
severe agitation and hallucinations. However, antipsychotic medications may
reduce the seizure threshold in patients. Dehydration, often exacerbated by
diaphoresis and fever, can be corrected with fluids given by mouth or IV.
Anorexia, vomiting, and diarrhea often occur during withdrawal. The
emergence of focal neurologic symptoms, lateralizing seizures, increased
intracranial pressure, or evidence of skull fractures or other indications of
CNS pathology should prompt clinicians to examine a patient for neurologic
disease.
Warm, supportive psychotherapy in the treatment of DTs is essential.
Patients are often bewildered, frightened, and anxious because of their
tumultuous symptoms, and skillful verbal support is imperative.
Protracted Withdrawal. Symptoms of anxiety, insomnia, and mild
autonomic overactivity are likely to continue for 2 to 6 months after the acute
withdrawal has disappeared. These protracted withdrawal symptoms may
enhance the probability of relapse. Although there is little evidence that
medications are helpful, it is possible that some of the medications used for
the rehabilitation phase, especially acamprosate, may work by diminishing
some of these symptoms. The clinician should warn the patient that some
level of sleep problems or feelings of nervousness might remain after acute
withdrawal and discuss cognitive and behavioral approaches that might be
appropriate to help the patient feel comfortable.
Rehabilitation
For most patients, rehabilitation includes three major components, which are
listed in Table 4-13. These components happen at a difficult time: the patient
may still be experiencing withdrawal symptoms as well as life crises.
Repetition will be necessary, with frequent reminders of how vital abstinence




<<<PAGE 952>>>

Autonomic symptoms
(e.g., sweating,
restlessness, tremor,
and rhinorrhea)

α2-agonist

Clonidine

Anxiety and psychomotor
agitation

Benzodiazepines
Lorazepam
(usually reserved for
the inpatient setting)

Insomnia

Hypnotics

Zolpidem,
zopiclone

Sedating
antidepressants

Trazodone

Atypical antipsychotics Quetiapine
Musculoskeletal pain

GI distress and diarrhea

Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs

Ibuprofen

Antispasmodic agents

Cyclobenzaprine

Antiemetic agents

Prochlorperazine

Peripheral μ-opioid
receptor agonists

Loperamide

Symptomatic Treatment of Opioid Withdrawal. It is also possible to
treat an opioid withdrawal with nonopioid medications, primarily targeting
several uncomfortable withdrawal symptoms. Table 4-23 lists some of these
medications and their uses.
Medications for the Treatment of Opioid Use Disorder
For some individuals, opioid detoxification is not successful, and others may
not feel ready for detoxification, although they may desire freedom from the
daily struggle associated with opioid use and the associated psychosocial
problems. In these individuals, opioid substitution therapy with either
methadone or buprenorphine may be appropriate. For patients who can
complete opioid detoxification, antagonist therapy can help them to maintain




<<<PAGE 963>>>

with the benzodiazepines. Table 4-24 lists the equivalent therapeutic doses of
benzodiazepines. Even when users take grossly excessive amounts (more
than 2 g) in suicide attempts, the symptoms include only drowsiness,
lethargy, ataxia, some confusion, and mild depression of the user’s vital
signs. The most lethal overdoses occur when the user takes a benzodiazepine
in combination with other sedatives, such as alcohol. In such cases, small
doses of benzodiazepines can cause death. The availability of flumazenil, a
specific benzodiazepine antagonist, has reduced the lethality of the
benzodiazepines. Flumazenil can be used in emergency departments to
reverse the effects of benzodiazepines.
Table 4-24
Approximate
Therapeutic
Benzodiazepines

Equivalent

Doses

Generic Name

Trade Name

Dose (mg)

Alprazolam

Xanax

1

Chlordiazepoxide

Librium

25

Clonazepam

Klonopin

0.5–1.0

Clorazepate

Tranxene

15

Diazepam

Valium

10

Estazolam

Prosom

1

Flurazepam

Dalmane

30

Lorazepam

Ativan

2

Oxazepam

Serax

30

Temazepam

Restoril

20

Triazolam

Halcion

0.25

Quazepam

Doral

15

Zolpidem

Ambien

10

of




<<<PAGE 970>>>

a. Hospitalize if there are medical or psychiatric indications, poor
social supports, or polysubstance dependence, or the patient is
unreliable.
b. Some clinicians recommend switching to longer-acting
benzodiazepine for withdrawal (e.g., diazepam, clonazepam);
others recommend stabilizing on the drug that patient was taking
or on phenobarbital.
c. After stabilization reduce dosage by 30% on the second or third
day and evaluate the response, keeping in mind that symptoms
that occur after decreases in benzodiazepines with short
elimination half-lives (e.g., lorazepam) appear sooner than with
those with longer elimination half-lives (e.g., diazepam).
d. Reduce dosage further by 10–25% every few days if tolerated.
e. Use adjunctive medications if necessary—carbamazepine, βadrenergic receptor antagonists, valproate, clonidine, and
sedative antidepressants have been used but their efficacy in
the treatment of the benzodiazepine abstinence syndrome has
not been established.
5. Detoxification from therapeutic dosages:
a. Initiate 10–25% dose reduction and evaluate response.
b. Dose, duration of therapy, and severity of anxiety influence the
rate of taper and need for adjunctive medications.
c. Most patients taking therapeutic doses have uncomplicated
discontinuation.
6. Psychological interventions may assist patients in detoxification
from benzodiazepines and in the long-term management of
anxiety.
Courtesy of Domenici A. Ciraulo, M.D., and Ofra Sarid-Segal, M.D.

Table 4-28
Pentobarbital
Withdrawal

Test

Dose

Procedure

Symptoms After Test Dose Estimated 24-Hr
of 200 mg Oral
Oral

for

Barbiturate

Estimated 24-Hr
Oral




<<<PAGE 1137>>>

second-generation and commonly used first generation antipsychotics.
Most guidelines recommend starting with a second-generation
antipsychotic. Although they are likely the most effective for patients with
severe symptoms, and predominantly positive symptoms, they are useful
across a broad range of symptoms and severity. There is little guidance for
choosing a specific medication: some studies suggest they have individual
differences in efficacy. However, the most significant difference between the
drugs is in their side effects, and we should consider these carefully when
choosing a treatment.
Agitation is a typical symptom in the acute phase. Clinicians have several
options for managing agitation that results from psychosis. Antipsychotics
and benzodiazepines can result in a relatively rapid calming of patients. With
highly agitated patients, intramuscular administration of antipsychotics
produces a more rapid effect. An advantage of an antipsychotic is that a
single intramuscular injection of a first- or second-generation antipsychotic
can often calm the patient without excessive sedation. Low-potency
antipsychotics are often associated with sedation and postural hypotension,
mainly when administering them intramuscularly. Intramuscular ziprasidone
and olanzapine are similar to their oral counterparts in not causing substantial
extrapyramidal side effects during acute treatment. This can be a significant
advantage over haloperidol or fluphenazine, which can cause frightening
dystonias or akathisia in some patients. A rapidly dissolving oral formulation
of olanzapine may also be helpful as an alternative to an intramuscular
injection.
Benzodiazepines are also useful for agitation during acute psychosis.
Lorazepam has the advantage of reliable absorption when administering it
either orally or intramuscularly. The use of benzodiazepines may also reduce
the amount of antipsychotic that is needed to control psychotic patients.
Treating Side Effects. Patients frequently experience the side effects of an
antipsychotic before they experience clinical improvement. Whereas a
clinical response may take days or weeks after starting a drug, side effects
may begin almost immediately. First-generation antipsychotics most
commonly cause extrapyramidal side effects, and in the case of low potency,
first-generation antipsychotics, sedation and postural hypotension, whereas
second-generation antipsychotics cause weight gain and metabolic




<<<PAGE 1891>>>

Benzodiazepines
Clonazepam

Klonopin

PO 1 mg bid Akathisia, acute
dystonia

Lorazepam

Ativan

PO 1 mg tid

Buspirone

BuSpar

PO 20–40
mg qid

Tardive dyskinesia

Vitamin E

—

PO 1,200–
1,600
IU/day

Tardive dyskinesia

PO, orally; IM, intramuscularly; IV, intravenously; bid, twice a day; tid, three times a day; qid;
four times a day.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS. The differential diagnosis

includes seizures and

tardive dyskinesia.
COURSE AND PROGNOSIS. Dystonia can fluctuate spontaneously and respond

to reassurance, so the clinician gets the false impression that the movement is
hysterical or entirely under conscious control.
Table 21-4
Treatment of Neuroleptic Malignant Syndrome
Intervention

Dosing

Effectiveness

Amantadine

200–400 mg PO/day in
divided doses

Beneficial as
monotherapy or
in combination;
decrease in
death rate

Bromocriptine

2.5 mg PO bid or tid, may
increase to a total of 45
mg/day

Mortality reduced
as a single or
combined agent

Levodopa/carbidopa Levodopa 50–100 mg/day

Case reports of




<<<PAGE 1948>>>

Clinical Guidelines for SDAs
All SDAs are appropriate for the management of an initial psychotic episode,
but clozapine is reserved for persons who are refractory to all other
antipsychotic drugs. If a person does not respond to the first SDA, other
SDAs should be tried. The choice of drug should be based on the patient’s
clinical status and history of response to medication. Recent studies have
challenged the notion that SDAs require 4 to 6 weeks to reach full
effectiveness, and it may take up to 8 weeks for the full clinical effects of an
SDA to become apparent. The newer meta-analyses suggest that the apparent
benefits may be seen as early as 2 to 3 weeks, and early response or failure is
an indicator of subsequent response or failure.
Nevertheless, it is acceptable practice to augment an SDA with a highpotency DRA or benzodiazepine in the first few weeks of use. Lorazepam
(Ativan) 1 to 2 mg orally or IM can be used as needed for acute agitation.
Once effective, dosages can be lowered as tolerated. Clinical improvement
may take 6 months of treatment with SDAs in some, particularly treatmentrefractory persons.
The use of all SDAs must be initiated at low dosages and gradually tapered
upward to therapeutic dosages. The potential development of adverse effects
necessitates the gradual increase in dosage. If a person stops taking an SDA
for more than 36 hours, drug use should be resumed at the initial titration
schedule. After the decision to terminate olanzapine or clozapine use, dosages
should be tapered whenever possible to avoid cholinergic rebound symptoms
such as diaphoresis, flushing, diarrhea, and hyperactivity.
After assuring themselves of the appropriateness of SDA treatment, the
clinician should explain the risks and benefits of SDA treatment to the person
and the family. In the case of clozapine, an informed consent procedure
should be documented in the person’s chart. The patient’s history should
include information about blood disorders, epilepsy, cardiovascular disease,
hepatic and renal diseases, and drug abuse. The presence of a hepatic or renal
disease necessitates using low starting dosages of the drug. The physical
examination should include supine and standing BP measurements to screen
for orthostatic hypotension. The laboratory examination should include an
ECG and several complete blood counts (CBCs) with WBC counts, which
can then be averaged; and liver and renal function tests. Periodic monitoring




<<<PAGE 1969>>>

include lorazepam (Ativan) (2 mg IM) and amobarbital (50 to 250 mg IM).
Rapid Neuroleptization. Rapid neuroleptization (also called
psychotolysis) is the practice of administering hourly IM doses of
antipsychotic medications until marked sedation is achieved. However,
several research studies have shown that merely waiting several more hours
after one dose yields the same clinical improvement as is seen with repeated
doses. Nevertheless, clinicians must be careful to keep patients from
becoming violent while they are psychotic. Clinicians can help prevent
violent episodes by using adjuvant sedatives or by temporarily using physical
restraints until the persons can control their behavior.
Early Treatment. A full 6 weeks may be necessary to evaluate the extent of
the improvement in psychotic symptoms. However, agitation and excitement
usually improve quickly with antipsychotic treatment. About 75 percent of
persons with a short history of illness show significant improvement in their
psychosis. Psychotic symptoms, both positive and negative, usually continue
to improve 3 to 12 months after the initiation of treatment.
About 5 mg of haloperidol or 300 mg of chlorpromazine is a usual
effective daily dose. In the past, much higher doses were used, but evidence
suggests that it resulted in more side effects without additional benefits. A
single daily dose is usually given at bedtime to help induce sleep and to
reduce the incidence of adverse effects. However, bedtime dosing for elderly
persons may increase their risk of falling if they get out of bed during the
night. The sedative effects of typical antipsychotics last only a few hours, in
contrast to the antipsychotic effects, which last for 1 to 3 days.
Intermittent Medications. It is a common clinical practice to order
medications to be given intermittently as needed (PRN). Although this
practice may be reasonable during the first few days that a person is
hospitalized, the amount of time the person takes antipsychotic drugs, rather
than an increase in dosage, is what produces therapeutic improvement.
Clinicians on inpatient services may feel pressured by staff members to write
PRN antipsychotic orders; such orders should include specific symptoms,
how often the drugs should be given, and how many doses can be given each
day. Clinicians may choose to use small doses for the PRN doses (e.g., 2 mg




<<<PAGE 1970>>>

of haloperidol) or use a benzodiazepine instead (e.g., 2 mg of lorazepam IM).
If PRN doses of an antipsychotic are necessary after the first week of
treatment, the clinician may want to consider increasing the standing daily
dose of the drug.
Maintenance Treatment. The first 3 to 6 months after a psychotic episode
are usually considered a period of stabilization. After that time, the dosage
can be decreased by about 20 percent every 6 months until the minimum
effective dosage is found. A person is usually maintained on antipsychotic
medications for 1 to 2 years after the first psychotic episode. Antipsychotic
treatment is often continued for 5 years after a second psychotic episode, and
lifetime maintenance is considered after the third psychotic episode, although
attempts to reduce the daily dosage can be made every 6 to 12 months.
Table 21-14
Dopamine Receptor Antagonists

Antipsychotic drugs are effective in controlling psychotic symptoms, but
persons may report that they prefer being off the drugs because they feel
better without them. The clinician must discuss maintenance medication with




<<<PAGE 1993>>>

CYP2D6 enzyme. Cimetidine can increase the concentration of sertraline and
paroxetine, and phenobarbital (Luminal) and phenytoin can decrease the
concentration of paroxetine. Because of the potential for interference with the
CYP2D6 enzyme, the coadministration of paroxetine with other
antidepressants, phenothiazines, and antiarrhythmic drugs should be
undertaken with caution. Paroxetine may increase the anticoagulant effect of
warfarin. Coadministration of paroxetine and tramadol may precipitate
serotonin syndrome in elderly persons.
Fluvoxamine. Among the SSRIs, fluvoxamine appears to present the most
risk for drug–drug interactions. Fluvoxamine is metabolized by the enzyme
CYP3A4, which may be inhibited by ketoconazole (Nizoral). Fluvoxamine
may increase the half-life of alprazolam, triazolam (Halcion), and diazepam,
and it should not be coadministered with these agents. Fluvoxamine may
increase theophylline levels threefold and warfarin levels twofold, with
significant clinical consequences; thus, the serum levels of the latter drugs
should be closely monitored, and the doses adjusted accordingly.
Fluvoxamine raises concentrations and may increase the activity of clozapine,
carbamazepine, methadone (Dolophine, Methadose), propranolol (Inderal),
and diltiazem (Cardizem). Fluvoxamine has no significant interactions with
lorazepam (Ativan) or digoxin (Lanoxin).
Citalopram. Citalopram is not a potent inhibitor of any CYP enzymes.
Concurrent administration of cimetidine increases concentrations of
citalopram by about 40 percent. Citalopram does not significantly affect the
metabolism of, nor is its metabolism significantly affected by, digoxin,
lithium, warfarin, carbamazepine, or imipramine (Tofranil). Citalopram
increases the plasma concentrations of metoprolol (Lopressor) twofold, but
this usually does not affect BP or heart rate. Data on coadministration of
citalopram and potent inhibitors of CYP3A4 or CYP2D6 are not available.
Escitalopram. Escitalopram is a moderate inhibitor of CYP2D6 and has
been shown to raise desipramine (Norpramin) and metoprolol concentrations
significantly.
Vilazodone. Vilazodone dose should be reduced to 20 mg when




<<<PAGE 2114>>>

The absorption, the attainment of peak concentrations, and the onset of
action are quickest for diazepam (Valium), lorazepam (Ativan), alprazolam
(Xanax), triazolam (Halcion), and estazolam (ProSom). The rapid onset of
effects is vital to persons who take a single dose of a benzodiazepine to calm
an episodic burst of anxiety or to fall asleep rapidly. Several benzodiazepines
are effective after intravenous (IV) injection, but only lorazepam and
midazolam (Versed) have rapid and reliable absorption after intramuscular
(IM) administration.
Diazepam, chlordiazepoxide, clonazepam (Klonopin), clorazepate,
flurazepam (Dalmane), and quazepam (Doral) have plasma half-lives of 30
hours to more than 100 hours and are technically described as long-acting
benzodiazepines. The plasma half-lives of these compounds can be as high as
200 hours in persons whose metabolism is genetically slow. Because the
attainment of steady-state plasma concentrations of the drugs can take up to 2
weeks, persons may experience symptoms and signs of toxicity after only 7
to 10 days of treatment with a dosage that seemed initially to be in the
therapeutic range.
Clinically, half-life alone does not necessarily determine the duration of
therapeutic action for most benzodiazepines. The fact that all
benzodiazepines are lipid-soluble to varying degrees means that
benzodiazepines and their active metabolites bind to plasma proteins. The
extent of this binding is proportional to their lipid solubility. The amount of
protein binding varies from 70 to 99 percent. Distribution, onset, and
termination of action after a single dose are thus determined mainly by
benzodiazepine lipid solubility, not elimination half-life. Preparations with
high lipid solubility, such as diazepam and alprazolam, are absorbed rapidly
from the GI tract and distribute rapidly to the brain by passive diffusion along
a concentration gradient, resulting in a rapid onset of action. However, as the
concentration of the medication increases in the brain and decreases in the
bloodstream, the concentration gradient reverses itself, and these medications
leave the brain rapidly, resulting in fast cessation of drug effect. Drugs with
longer elimination half-lives, such as diazepam, may remain in the
bloodstream for a substantially more extended time than their actual
pharmacologic action at benzodiazepine receptors because the concentration
in the brain decreases rapidly below the level necessary for a noticeable
effect.




<<<PAGE 2115>>>

In contrast, lorazepam, which has a shorter elimination half-life than
diazepam but is less lipid-soluble, has a slower onset of action after a single
dose because the drug is absorbed and enters the brain more slowly.
However, the duration of action after a single dose is longer because it takes
longer for lorazepam to leave the brain and for brain levels to decrease below
the concentration that produces an effect. In chronic dosing, some of these
differences are not as apparent because brain levels are in equilibrium with
higher and more consistent steady-state blood levels, but additional doses still
produce a more rapid but briefer action with diazepam than with lorazepam.
Benzodiazepines are distributed widely in adipose tissue. As a result,
medications may persist in the body after discontinuation longer than would
be predicted from their elimination half-lives. Also, the dynamic half-life
(i.e., duration of action on the receptor) may be longer than the elimination
half-life.
The advantages of long–half-life drugs over short–half-life drugs include
less frequent dosing, less variation in plasma concentration, and less severe
withdrawal phenomena. The disadvantages include drug accumulation,
increased risk of daytime psychomotor impairment, and increased daytime
sedation.
The half-lives of lorazepam, oxazepam (Serax), temazepam (Restoril), and
estazolam are between 8 and 30 hours. Alprazolam has a half-life of 10 to 15
hours, and triazolam has the shortest half-life (2 to 3 hours) of all the orally
administered benzodiazepines. Rebound insomnia and anterograde amnesia
are thought to be more of a problem with the short–half-life drugs than with
the long–half-life drugs.
Because the administration of medications more frequently than the
elimination half-life leads to drug accumulation, medications such as
diazepam and flurazepam accumulate with daily dosing, eventually resulting
in increased daytime sedation.
Some benzodiazepines (e.g., oxazepam) are conjugated directly by
glucuronidation and are excreted. Most benzodiazepines are oxidized first by
CYP3A4 and CYP2C19, often to active metabolites. These metabolites may
then be hydroxylated to another active metabolite. For example, diazepam is
oxidized to desmethyldiazepam, which, in turn, is hydroxylated to produce
oxazepam. These products undergo glucuronidation to inactive metabolites.
Several benzodiazepines (e.g., diazepam, chlordiazepoxide) have the same




<<<PAGE 2117>>>

of panic disorder, benzodiazepines have the advantage of working quickly
and not causing significant sexual dysfunction and weight gain. However, the
SSRIs are still often preferred because they target common comorbid
conditions, such as depression or OCD. Benzodiazepines and SSRIs can be
initiated together to treat acute panic symptoms; use of the benzodiazepine
can be tapered after 3 to 4 weeks once the therapeutic benefits of the SSRI
have emerged.
SOCIAL ANXIETY DISORDER. Clonazepam is an effective treatment for social

anxiety disorder. Also, several other benzodiazepines (e.g., diazepam) have
been used as adjunctive medications for the treatment of social anxiety
disorder.
Benzodiazepines are used adjunctively for
treatment of adjustment disorder with anxiety, pathologic anxiety associated
with life events (e.g., after an accident), OCD, and PTSD.
OTHER ANXIETY DISORDERS.

ANXIETY ASSOCIATED WITH DEPRESSION. Depressed patients often experience

significant anxiety, and antidepressant drugs may cause initial exacerbation
of these symptoms. Accordingly, benzodiazepines are indicated for the
treatment of anxiety associated with depression.
Bipolar I and II Disorders
Clonazepam, lorazepam, and alprazolam are useful in the management of
acute manic episodes and as an adjuvant to maintenance therapy instead of
antipsychotics. As an adjuvant to lithium (Eskalith) or lamotrigine
(Lamictal), clonazepam may result in an increased time between cycles and
fewer depressive episodes. Benzodiazepines may help patients with bipolar
disorder sleep better.
Catatonia. Lorazepam, sometimes in low doses (less than 5 mg/day) and
sometimes in very high doses (12 mg/day or more), is regularly used to treat
acute catatonia, which is more frequently associated with bipolar disorder
than with schizophrenia. Other benzodiazepines have also been said to be
helpful. However, there are no valid controlled trials of benzodiazepines in
catatonia. Chronic catatonia does not respond as well to benzodiazepines.




<<<PAGE 2118>>>

The definitive treatment for catatonia is ECT.
Akathisia. The first-line drug for akathisia is most commonly a β-adrenergic
receptor antagonist. However, benzodiazepines are also useful in treating
some patients with akathisia.
Other Psychiatric Indications. Chlordiazepoxide (Librium) and
clorazepate (Tranxene) are used to manage the symptoms of alcohol
withdrawal. The benzodiazepines (especially IM lorazepam) are used to
manage substance-induced and psychotic agitation in the emergency
department. Benzodiazepines have been used instead of amobarbital
(Amytal) for drug-assisted interviewing.
Flumazenil for Benzodiazepine Overdosage. Flumazenil is used to
reverse the adverse psychomotor, amnestic, and sedative effects of
benzodiazepine receptor agonists. Flumazenil is administered IV and has a
half-life of 7 to 15 minutes. The most common adverse effects of flumazenil
are nausea, vomiting, dizziness, agitation, emotional lability, cutaneous
vasodilation, injection-site pain, fatigue, impaired vision, and headache. The
most common serious adverse effect associated with the use of flumazenil is
the precipitation of seizures, which is most likely to occur in persons with
seizure disorders, those who are physically dependent on benzodiazepines,
and those who have ingested large quantities of benzodiazepines. Flumazenil
alone may impair memory retrieval.
In mixed-drug overdosage, the toxic effects (e.g., seizures and cardiac
arrhythmias) of other drugs (e.g., TCAs) may emerge with the reversal of the
benzodiazepine effects of flumazenil. For example, seizures caused by an
overdosage of TCAs may have been partially treated in a person who had
also taken an overdosage of benzodiazepines. With flumazenil treatment, the
tricyclic-induced seizures or cardiac arrhythmias may appear and result in a
fatal outcome. Flumazenil does not reverse the effects of ethanol,
barbiturates, or opioids.
For the initial management of a known or suspected benzodiazepine
overdosage, the recommended initial dosage of flumazenil is 0.2 mg (2 mL)
administered IV over 30 seconds. If the desired consciousness is not obtained
after 30 seconds, a further dose of 0.3 mg (3 mL) can be administered over 30




<<<PAGE 2122>>>

Hyperacusis

Myoclonus

Nausea

Delirium

Difficulty concentrating

Seizures

Drug Interactions
The most common and potentially severe benzodiazepine receptor agonist
interaction is excessive sedation and respiratory depression occurring when
benzodiazepines are administered concomitantly with other CNS depressants,
such as alcohol, barbiturates, tricyclic and tetracyclic drugs, DRAs, opioids,
and antihistamines. Ataxia and dysarthria may be likely to occur when
lithium, antipsychotics, and clonazepam are combined. The combination of
benzodiazepines and clozapine (Clozaril) has been reported to cause delirium
and should be avoided. Cimetidine (Tagamet), disulfiram (Antabuse),
isoniazid, estrogen, and oral contraceptives increase the plasma concentration
of diazepam, chlordiazepoxide, clorazepate, and flurazepam. However,
antacids may reduce the GI absorption of benzodiazepines. The plasma
concentrations of triazolam and alprazolam are increased to potentially toxic
concentrations by nefazodone (Serzone) and fluvoxamine (Luvox).
The manufacturer of nefazodone recommends that the dosage of triazolam
be lowered by 75 percent, and the dosage of alprazolam be lowered by 50
percent, when given concomitantly with nefazodone. Over-the-counter
preparations of the kava plant, advertised as a “natural tranquilizer,” can
potentiate the action of benzodiazepine receptor agonists through synergistic
overactivation of GABA receptors. Carbamazepine can lower the plasma
concentration of alprazolam. Antacids and food may decrease the plasma
concentrations of benzodiazepines, and smoking may increase the
metabolism of benzodiazepines. The benzodiazepines may increase the
plasma concentrations of phenytoin and digoxin (Lanoxin). The SSRIs may
prolong and exacerbate the severity of zolpidem-induced hallucinations.
Deaths have been reported when parental lorazepam is given with parental
olanzapine.
Dosage and Clinical Guidelines




<<<PAGE 2214>>>

whether the person still requires the drug. Anticholinergic drugs should be
tapered over 1 to 2 weeks.
Treatment with anticholinergics as prophylaxis against the development of
neuroleptic-induced parkinsonism is usually not indicated because the onset
of its symptoms is usually sufficiently mild and gradual to allow the clinician
to initiate treatment only after it is indicated. In young men, prophylaxis may
be indicated, however, mainly if a high-potency DRA is being used. The
clinician should attempt to discontinue the antiparkinsonian agent in 4 to 6
weeks to assess whether its continued use is necessary.
NEUROLEPTIC-INDUCED ACUTE DYSTONIA. For the short-term treatment and

prophylaxis of neuroleptic-induced acute dystonia, 1 to 2 mg of benztropine
or its equivalent in another drug should be given IM. The dose can be
repeated in 20 to 30 minutes, as needed. If the person still does not improve
in another 20 to 30 minutes, a benzodiazepine (e.g., 1 mg IM or IV
lorazepam [Ativan]) should be given. Laryngeal dystonia is a medical
emergency and should be treated with benztropine, up to 4 mg in 10 minutes,
followed by 1 to 2 mg of lorazepam, administered slowly by the IV route.
Prophylaxis against dystonias is indicated in persons who have had one
episode or in persons at high risk (young men taking high-potency DRAs).
Prophylactic treatment is given for 4 to 8 weeks and then gradually tapered
over 1 to 2 weeks to allow assessment of its continued need. The prophylactic
use of anticholinergics in persons requiring antipsychotic drugs has mostly
become a moot issue because of the availability of SDAs, which are
relatively free of parkinsonian effects.
AKATHISIA. As mentioned, anticholinergics are not the drugs of choice for this

syndrome. The β-adrenergic receptor antagonists and perhaps the
benzodiazepines and clonidine are preferable drugs to try initially.

ANTIHISTAMINES
Antihistamines are frequently used in the treatment of a variety of psychiatric
disorders because of their sedative and anticholinergic activities. Certain
antihistamines (antagonists of histamine H1 receptors) are used to treat
neuroleptic-induced parkinsonism and neuroleptic-induced acute dystonia




<<<PAGE 2560>>>

in time, they reach their understanding.
In an emergency, as in any other psychiatric situation, when a clinician
does not know what to say, the best approach is to listen. Persons in crisis
reveal how much they need support, denial, ventilation, and words to
conceptualize the meaning of their crisis and to discover paths to resolution.
Pharmacotherapy
The primary indications for the use of psychotropic medication in an
emergency room include violent or assaultive behavior, massive anxiety or
panic, and extrapyramidal reactions, such as dystonia and akathisia as
adverse effects of psychiatric drugs. Laryngospasm is a rare form of dystonia,
and psychiatrists should be prepared to maintain an open airway with
intubation if necessary.
Persons who are delusional or in a state of catatonic excitement require
tranquilization. Episodic outbursts of violence may respond to antipsychotics
(haloperidol, second-generation antipsychotics), benzodiazepines and
antihistamines. If history suggests a seizure disorder, use clinical studies to
confirm the diagnosis and evaluation to ascertain the cause. If the findings are
positive, anticonvulsant therapy is initiated, or appropriate surgery is
provided (e.g., in the case of a cerebral mass). Conservative measures may
suffice for intoxication from drugs of abuse. Sometimes, drugs such as
haloperidol (5 to 10 mg every half-hour to an hour) are needed until a patient
is stabilized. Benzodiazepines may be used instead of, or in addition to,
antipsychotics (to reduce the antipsychotic dosage). When a recreational drug
has strong anticholinergic properties, benzodiazepines are more appropriate
than antipsychotics.
Violent, struggling patients are subdued most effectively with an
appropriate sedative or antipsychotic. Diazepam (5 to 10 mg) or lorazepam (2
to 4 mg) may be given slowly intravenously (IV) over 2 minutes. Clinicians
must give IV medication with great care to avoid respiratory arrest. Patients
who require IM medication can be sedated with haloperidol (5 to 10 mg IM).
If the furor is caused by alcohol or is part of a postseizure psychomotor
disturbance, the sleep produced by a relatively small amount of an IV
medication may go on for hours. On awakening, patients are often entirely
alert and rational and typically have complete amnesia about the violent




<<<PAGE 3604>>>

Associations
exploration of, 15
studies, 990
Associative learning, 1023
Associative visual agnosia, 927
Astereognosis, 925
Astrocytes, 50, 924
Astrotactin, 949
Ataque de Nervios, 1053
Ataxia, 21
Atomoxetine, 685–686
for ADHD management, 686
dosage and clinical guidelines, 686
effect on cognition, 686
pharmacologic actions, 686
precautions and adverse reactions, 686
therapeutic indications, 686
for tic disorder, 161
Atopognosia, 88
Atracurium, 733
Ativan, see Lorazepam
Atropine sulfate, 619
Attachment, 891–892, 1012t
anxiety, 1012–1013
defined, 1011
development, 1011
disorders of, 1013
fathers and, 892
phases of, 1011–1012
strange situation, 1012t
theory, 167, 1011–1013
child maltreatment, 1013
psychiatric applications, 1013
types of, 892t
Attachment and Biobehavioral Catch-up (ABC) intervention, 170
Attention, assessment of, 54
Attention cathexis, 1060




<<<PAGE 3681>>>

thyroid effects, 652
toxicity and overdoses, 652–653, 652t
psychiatric uses of, 650t
therapeutic indications, 649–650
toxicity, 63
Liver function tests (LFTs), 66
Living will, 858
LOD (logarithm of the odds) scores, 988
Longitudinal, Expert, All Data (LEAD) standard, 31
Long-term potentiation (LTP), 1023
Lophophora diffusa, 320
Lophophora williamsii, 320
Lorazepam, 615
Lorenz, Konrad, 1042–1043
Loss of ego boundaries, 338
LSD. See Lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD)
L-tryptophan, for insomnia, 509
Lumateperone, 608, 615
Lurasidone, 608
for bipolar disorder, 375t
dosages, 615
drug interactions, 615
indications, 614
for schizophrenia, 352t
side effects, 614–615
Luria, Alexander, 52
Luria-Nebraska Neuropsychological Battery: Children’s Revision
NNB:C, 83t
Lyme disease, 256, 986
Lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD), 213, 215, 303, 319
onset of action of, 319
physiologic symptoms of, 319, 319t
Machover Draw-A-Person Test (DAP), 83t
Madrid Declaration, 880
Magnesium levels, in alcohol-abusing patients, 65


