<<<PAGE 326>>>

should be very cautious when choosing to use these medications beyond an
acute crisis.
Other medications, such as anticonvulsants and antioxidants, may be
helpful; however, the data are not conclusive. GABA analogs, such as
piracetam, may have promise, but the supportive data are limited.
ATTENTION-DEFICIT/HYPERACTIVITY DISORDER.

The existing data for the
treatment of ADHD and ADHD-like symptoms in youth with sub-average
intelligence and developmental disorders suggest that agents, particularly
stimulants used to treat ADHD in typically developing children, provide
some degree of benefit to children with intellectual disability and ADHD.
However, these children experience more side effects than ADHD children
without an intellectual disability. Thus, recommendations regarding the
treatment of ADHD in children and adolescents with comorbid intellectual
disability include close monitoring for side effects. Studies of
methylphenidate treatment in those mildly intellectually disabled with ADHD
show significant improvement in the ability to maintain attention and to stay
focused on tasks. Methylphenidate treatment studies have not shown
evidence of long-term improvement in social skills or learning. Risperidone
may be beneficial in reducing symptoms of ADHD in this population;
however, as with all antipsychotics, it has substantial side effects. Thus
stimulant medications are the preferred choice.
In addition to stimulants and antipsychotics, clonidine has been used
clinically in this population, especially to ameliorate hyperactivity and
impulsivity. Although there are scant data, clinical ratings by parents and
clinicians suggest its efficacy. Atomoxetine may also help for this population.
DEPRESSIVE DISORDERS. The identification of depressive disorders among

individuals with intellectual disabilities requires careful evaluation since they
are easy to miss when behavioral problems are prominent. There have been
anecdotal reports of disinhibition in response to SSRIs in intellectually
disabled individuals with ASD. Given the relative safety of SSRI
antidepressants, it is reasonable to try them when a child with an intellectual
disability is depressed.
STEREOTYPICAL MOTOR MOVEMENTS. Antipsychotic medications are used in




<<<PAGE 414>>>

and inattention in preschoolers with autism spectrum disorder found the
stimulant safe and relatively efficacious; half of the preschoolers developed
side effects including increased stereotypies, gastrointestinal upset, sleep
problems, and emotional lability. Among nonstimulants, one double-blind
placebo-controlled study of hyperactivity, impulsivity, and inattention using
atomoxetine in children with autism spectrum disorder found that it was
significantly more effective than placebo. Side effects included sedation,
irritability, constipation, and nausea. Clonidine, an α-agonist, has also been
studied in children with autism spectrum disorder for the treatment of
hyperactivity with mixed results. Guanfacine may also help in some cases.
Repetitive and Stereotypic Behavior. Antidepressants and mood
stabilizers have been studied for the treatment of these core symptoms of
autism spectrum disorder. One study with fluoxetine found the medication
group only slightly better and not significantly better than the placebo group
regarding the target symptoms, and another trial with escitalopram found no
difference between groups. Risperidone, however, was found to be effective
in targeting irritability, and restrictive and repetitive behaviors were
improved. One study using valproate in a 12-week trial with 55 children with
a mean age of 9½ years with autism spectrum disorder found that those who
were considered responders to irritability also spent less time engaging in
repetitive behaviors.
Agents Administered for Behavioral Impairment in Autism
Spectrum Disorder Based On Open Trials. Quetiapine is an
antipsychotic with more potent 5-HT2A than D2 receptor blocking properties.
Although there are only open-label trials with this agent, some experts use
this when risperidone and olanzapine fail or are intolerable. Doses range from
50 to 200 mg/day. Adverse effects include drowsiness, tachycardia, agitation,
and weight gain.
Clozapine has a heterocyclic chemical structure that is related to certain
first-generation antipsychotics, such as loxapine, although clozapine carries a
lower risk of extrapyramidal symptoms. It is not generally used in the
treatment of aggression and self-injurious behavior unless those behaviors
coexist with psychotic symptoms. The most severe adverse effect is
agranulocytosis, which necessitates monitoring white blood cell count weekly




<<<PAGE 434>>>

TREATMENT
Pharmacotherapy
Pharmacologic treatment is considered the first line of treatment for ADHD.
CNS stimulants are the first choice of agents in that they have the highest
efficacy with generally mild tolerable side effects. Children, adolescents, and
adults with known cardiac risks and abnormalities should not use stimulants.
In healthy youths, both short- and sustained-release preparations have
excellent safety records. The newer preparations aim to maximize the target
effects and minimize the adverse effects in individuals with ADHD who
obtain a partial response from methylphenidate or whose dose was limited by
side effects.
Current strategies favor once a day sustained-release stimulant preparations
for their convenience and diminished rebound side effects. Advantages of the
sustained-release preparations are that a single dose will sustain the effects all
day, and the medication is sustained at an approximately even level in the
body throughout the day. In general the immediate-release preparations are
expected to last 1 to 4 hours and extended-release preparations are expected
to last up to 8 hours, with exceptions for the transdermal patch, which lasts an
hour after it is removed.
Nonstimulant medications approved by the FDA in the treatment of
ADHD include atomoxetine, a norepinephrine uptake inhibitor. Unlike the
stimulants, atomoxetine carries with it a black-box warning for potential
increases in suicidal thoughts or behaviors and requires children with ADHD
to be monitored for these symptoms, similarly to children taking
antidepressants. α-agonists, including clonidine and guanfacine, are also
useful in treating ADHD. The FDA has approved the extended-release form
of clonidine and the extended-release form of guanfacine for the treatment of
ADHD in children 6 years and older. Antidepressants, such as bupropion,
have been used with variable success in the treatment of ADHD. Table 2-16
indicates FDA-approved ages for ADHD medications.)
Stimulant Medications. Methylphenidate and amphetamine preparations
are dopamine agonists; however, the precise mechanism of the stimulant’s




<<<PAGE 438>>>

tablet)
Dextroamphetamine/amphetamine
Adderall

Dextroamphetamine/amphetamine

3 and
older

Adderall XR

Dextroamphetamine/amphetamine
(extended release)

6 and
older

Mydayis

Dextroamphetamine/amphetamine
(extended release)

13 and
older

Lisdexamfetamine

6 and
older

Atomoxetine

6 and
older

Kapvay

Clonidine (extended release)

6–17

Intuniv

Guanfacine (extended release)

6–17

Lisdexamfetamine
Vyvanse
Nonstimulants
Strattera
Alpha Agonists

CNS STIMULANT SIDE EFFECTS. CNS stimulants are generally well tolerated,

and the current consensus is that once a day dosing is preferable for
convenience and to minimize rebound side effects. Long-term tolerability of
once-daily mixed amphetamine salts has shown mild side effects, most
commonly decreased appetite, insomnia, and headache. There are a variety of
strategies for children or adolescents with ADHD who respond favorably to
methylphenidate, but for whom insomnia has become a significant problem.
Clinical strategies to manage insomnia include the use of diphenhydramine
(25 to 75 mg), a low dose of trazodone (25 to 50 mg), or the addition of an αadrenergic agent, such as guanfacine. In some cases, insomnia may attenuate
on its own after several months of treatment.




<<<PAGE 439>>>

Nonstimulant Medications. Atomoxetine HCl is a norepinephrine uptake
inhibitor approved by the FDA for the treatment of ADHD in children age 6
years and older. The mechanism of action is not well understood, but likely
involves selective inhibition of the presynaptic norepinephrine transporter.
Atomoxetine absorbs well in the gastrointestinal tract, and it reaches maximal
plasma levels in 1 to 2 hours after ingestion. It is useful for inattention as well
as impulsivity in children and adults with ADHD. Its half-life is
approximately 5 hours and is given twice daily in most cases. The most
common side effects include diminished appetite, abdominal discomfort,
dizziness, and irritability. In some cases, there were increases in blood
pressure and heart rate. Atomoxetine is metabolized by the cytochrome P450
(CYP) 2D6 hepatic enzyme system. A small fraction of the population are
poor metabolizers of CYP 2D6–metabolized drugs, and, for those
individuals, plasma concentrations of the drug may increase as much as
fivefold for a given dose of medication. Drugs that inhibit CYP 2D6,
including fluoxetine, paroxetine, and quinidine, may lead to increased plasma
levels of this medication. Despite its short half-life, research suggests that
atomoxetine can reduce symptoms of ADHD in children during the school
day when administered once daily. Another recent study of a combination of
atomoxetine alone and combined with fluoxetine in the treatment of 127
children with ADHD and symptoms of anxiety or depression suggested that
atomoxetine alone can lead to improvements in mood and anxiety. Children
who received combined atomoxetine and fluoxetine experienced more
significant increases in blood pressure and pulse than those taking
atomoxetine only.
α-Agonists, both short-acting and the extended-release forms of clonidine
hydrochloride and guanfacine, are FDA approved for the treatment of ADHD
in children and adolescents from 6 to 7 years of age. Clonidine, a centrally
acting α2-adrenergic receptor agonist, likely exerts its effect on the prefrontal
cortex, although the mechanism of action is unknown. It is available in 0.1mg and 0.2-mg tablets, and is generally used twice daily, once in the morning
and once at night, to provide an around-the-clock effect. Clonidine is initiated
at 0.1 mg at bedtime, with incremental weekly increases of 0.1 mg. The
maximum dose recommended is 0.2 mg twice daily. The extended-release
formulation is not interchangeable with the short-acting clonidine. Because it




<<<PAGE 512>>>

agonist and a 5-HT2A antagonist. A multisite double-blind controlled study of
aripiprazole in children with Tourette disorder in China found a reduction in
tic behaviors in about 60 percent of the aripiprazole group compared to about
64 percent reduction in a group treated with tiapride, a benzamide with
selective D2 receptor antagonism. There was no significant difference
between the two groups. Although sedation and sleep disturbance are
common side effects with aripiprazole, weight gain is less pronounced than
with risperidone.
Olanzapine and ziprasidone are also efficacious in the treatment of tic
disorders in at least one RCT. Sedation and weight gain were prominent side
effects with olanzapine, and potential QT prolongation was an issue with
ziprasidone. Quetiapine is a potentially useful agent in the treatment of tics,
with its higher affinity for 5-HT2 receptors than for D2 receptors. However,
randomized clinical trials are needed. Clozapine, contrary to many other
atypical antipsychotics, is not useful in the treatment of tics.
NORADRENERGIC AGENTS.

Noradrenergic agents, including clonidine and
guanfacine, as well as atomoxetine, are frequently used in children as primary
treatments or adjunctive treatments for comorbid ADHD and tics. Several
studies have provided some evidence for the efficacy of clonidine, an α2adrenergic agent, in the treatment of tics in children, adolescents, and adults
with tic disorders. The largest randomized trial with oral clonidine compared
to placebo found a modest reduction in tics with clonidine. A multisite
randomized, double-blind placebo-controlled trial using the clonidine patch
in the treatment of tic disorders in children found a significant improvement
in tic symptoms (about 69 percent) compared to about 47 percent of the
children in the control group. The usual dose range for clonidine is from 0.05
mg orally three times daily to 0.1 mg four times daily, and for guanfacine, it
is from 1 to 4 mg/day. When used in these dosage ranges, adverse effects of
the α-adrenergic agents may include drowsiness, headache, irritability, and
occasional hypotension.
Guanfacine can treat children with ADHD successfully, although its
efficacy regarding reducing tics is controversial. In one randomized clinical
trial treating 34 children with ADHD and tics, guanfacine was superior to
placebo in the reduction of tics. In another double-blind placebo-controlled




<<<PAGE 513>>>

trial of 24 children with Tourette disorder, guanfacine was not superior to
placebo.
Atomoxetine, a selective norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor, was found to
reduce both tics and ADHD symptoms in a multicenter industry trial of 148
children. Atomoxetine also reduced both tics and ADHD in a subgroup of
patients in this study who had Tourette disorder. Additional studies are
needed to confirm the safety and efficacy of atomoxetine in the treatment of
children with Tourette disorder.
Given the frequent comorbidity of tic behaviors and obsessive-compulsive
symptoms or disorders, the SSRIs have been used alone or in combination
with antipsychotics in the treatment of Tourette disorder. They seem to be
useful, however, there have not been controlled trials yet to determine the
effect of SSRIs on tic reduction.
Although clinicians must weigh the risks and benefits of using stimulants
in cases of severe hyperactivity and comorbid tics, data suggest that
methylphenidate does not increase the rate or intensity of motor or vocal tics
in most children with hyperactivity and tic disorders.
ALTERNATIVE

AGENTS:

TETRABENAZINE,

TOPIRAMATE,

AND

TETRAHYDROCANNABINOL

Tetrabenazine. A vesicular monoamine transporter type 2 inhibitor,
tetrabenazine depletes presynaptic dopamine and serotonin and blocks
postsynaptic dopamine receptors. There are no randomized clinical trials of
this agent in the treatment of Tourette disorder in children; however, clinical
experience suggests that this agent may have benefit in tic reduction. In a
follow-up of 2 years of treatment in 77 children and adolescents, one study
reports tic reduction improvement in 80 percent of subjects. Side effects of
this agent include sedation, parkinsonism, depression, insomnia, anxiety, and
akathisia.
Topiramate. A GABAergic drug, used primarily as an anticonvulsant,
topiramate, was effective for reducing tics in a small randomized clinical trial
of children and adults with Tourette disorder. Side effects were minimal.
Although this does not confirm its efficacy, GABA-modulating agents
deserve further study in the treatment of tic disorders.




<<<PAGE 695>>>

Pelham WE, Manos MJ, Ezzell CE, Tresco KE, Gnagy EM, Hoffman MT,
Onyango AN, Fabiano GA, Lopez-Williams A, Wymbs BT, Caserta D,
Chronis AM, Burrows-Maclean L, Morse G. A dose-ranging study of a
methylphenidate transdermal system in children with ADHD. J Am Acad
Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2005;44:522.
Ratner A, Laor N, Bronstein Y, Weizman A, Toren P. Six-week open-label
reboxetine treatment in children and adolescents with attentiondeficit/hyperactivity disorder. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry.
2005;44:428.
Sassi RB. In this issue/Abstract thinking: from pixels to voxels: television,
brain, and behavior. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2013;52:665–
666.
Stevens LJ, Kuczek T, Burgess JR, Hurt E, Arnold LE. Dietary sensitivities
and ADHD symptoms: thirty-five years of research. Clin Pediatr.
2011;50:279–293.
Tresco KE, Lefler EK, Power TJ. Psychosocial interventions to improve the
school performance of students with attention-deficit/hyperactivity
disorder. Mind Brain. 2011;1:69–74.
Weiss M, Tannock R, Kratochvil C, Dunn D, Velez-Borras J, Thomason C,
Tamura R, Kelsey D, Stevens L, Allen AJ. A randomized, placebocontrolled study of once-daily atomoxetine in the school setting in children
with ADHD. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2005;44:647.
Learning Disorders
Archibald LMD, Cardy JO, Joanisse MF, Ansari D. Language, reading, and
math learning profiles in an epidemiological sample of school age children.
PLoS One. 2013;8:e77463.
Badian NA. Persistent arithmetic, reading, or arithmetic and reading
disability. Ann Dyslexia. 1999;49:43–70.
Bergstrom KM, Lachmann T. Does noise affect learning? A short review on
noise effects on cognitive performance in children. Front Psychol.
2013;4:578.
Bernstein S, Atkinson AR, Martimianakis MA. Diagnosing the learner in
difficulty. Pediatrics. 2013;132:210–212.
Bishop DV. Genetic influences on language impairment and literacy
problems in children: same or different? J Child Psychol Psychiatry.




<<<PAGE 701>>>

Roessner V, Plessen KJ, Rothenberger A, Ludolph AG, Rizzo R, Skov L.
European clinical guidelines for Tourette syndrome and other tic disorders.
Part II: pharmacologic treatment. Eur Child Adolesc Psychiatry.
2011;20:173–196.
Rothenbertger A, Roessner V. Functional neuroimaging investigations of
motor networks in Tourette syndrome. Behav Neurol. 2013;27:47–55.
Scharf JM, Miller LL, Mathews CA, Ben-Shlomo Y. Prevalence of Tourette
syndrome and chronic tics in the population-based Avon longitudinal study
of parents and children cohort. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry.
2012;51:192–201.
Spencer TJ, Sallee FR, Gilbert DL, Dunn DW, McCracken JT, Coffey BJ.
Atomoxetine treatment of ADHD in children with comorbid Tourette
syndrome. J Atten Disord. 2008;11:470–481.
Steeves T, McKinlay BD, Gorman D, Billinghurst L, Day L, Carrol A, Dion
Y, Doja A, Luscombe S, Sandor P, Pringsheim T. Canadian guidelines for
the evidence-based treatment of tic disorders: behavioural therapy, deep
brain stimulation and transcranial magnetic stimulation. Can J Psychiatry.
2012;57:144–151.
Storch EA, Murphy TK, Geffken GR, Sajid M, Allen P, Roberti JW,
Goodman WK. Reliability and validity of the Yale Global Tic Severity
Scale. Psychol Assess. 2005;17:486.
Thomas R, Cavanna AE. The pharmacology of Tourette syndrome. J Neural
Transm. 2013;120(4):689–694.
Verdellen C, Griendt JVD, Hartmann A, Murphy T, the ESSTS Guidelines
Group. European clinical guidelines for Tourette syndrome and other tic
disorders. Part III: behavioural and psychosocial interventions. Eur Child
Adolesc Psychiatry. 2011;20:97–207.
Weisman H, Qureshi IA, Leckman JF, Scahill L, Bloch MH. Systematic
review: pharmacological treatment of tic disorders—Efficacy of
antipsychotic and alpha-2 adrenergic agonist agents. Neurosci Biobehav
Rev. 2013;37(6):1162–1171.
Woods DW, Piacentini JC, Scahill L, Peterson AL, Wilhelm S, Chang S.
Behavior therapy for tics in children: acute and long-term effects on
psychiatric and psychosocial functioning. J Child Neurol. 2011;7:858–865.
Feeding Disorders




<<<PAGE 2007>>>

bupropion on smoking cessation may be related to its effects on dopamine
reward pathways or inhibition of nicotinic acetylcholine receptors.
Therapeutic Indications
Depression. Although overshadowed by the SSRIs as first-line treatment
for major depression, the therapeutic efficacy of bupropion in depression is
well established in both outpatient and inpatient settings. Observed rates of
response and remission are comparable to those seen with the SSRIs.
Bupropion has been found to prevent seasonal major depressive episodes in
patients with a history of seasonal patterns or affective disorder.
Smoking Cessation. Bupropion is indicated for use in combination with
behavioral modification programs for smoking cessation. It is intended to be
used in patients who are highly motivated and who receive some form of
structured behavioral support. Bupropion is most effective when combined
with nicotine substitutes (Nico-Derm, Nicotrol).
Bipolar Disorders. Bupropion is less likely than TCAs to precipitate mania
in persons with bipolar I disorder and less likely than other antidepressants to
exacerbate or induce rapid-cycling bipolar II disorder; however, the evidence
about the use of bupropion in the treatment of patients with bipolar disorder
is limited.
Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder. Bupropion is used as a
second-line agent, after the sympathomimetics, for treatment of ADHD. It
has not been compared with proven ADHD medications such as
methylphenidate (Ritalin) or atomoxetine (Strattera) for childhood and adult
ADHD. Bupropion is an appropriate choice for persons with comorbid
ADHD and depression or persons with comorbid ADHD, conduct disorder,
or substance use disorder. It may also be considered for use in patients who
develop tics when treated with psychostimulants.
Cocaine Detoxification. Bupropion may be associated with a euphoric
feeling; thus, it may be contraindicated in persons with histories of substance
abuse. However, because of its dopaminergic effects, bupropion has been
explored as a treatment for cocaine cravings. Results have been inconclusive,




<<<PAGE 2151>>>

Concomitant use with a PDE-5 inhibitor can result in additive BP-lowering
effects and symptomatic hypotension; therefore, PDE-5 inhibitor therapy
should be initiated at the lowest dose in patients taking prazosin.

21.6 Stimulants
STIMULANT DRUGS AND ATOMOXETINE
Stimulant drugs increase motivation, mood, energy, and wakefulness. They
are also called sympathomimetics because they mimic the physiologic effects
of the neurotransmitter epinephrine. Several chemical classes are included in
this group.
Currently, these drugs are most commonly used to treat symptoms of poor
concentration and hyperactivity in children and adults with ADHD.
Paradoxically, many patients with ADHD find that these drugs can have a
calming effect. Sympathomimetics are also approved for use in increasing
alertness in narcolepsy.
Amphetamines were the first stimulants to be synthesized. They were
created in the late 19th century and were used by Bavarian soldiers in the
mid-1880s to maintain wakefulness, alertness, energy, and confidence in
combat. They have been used similarly in most wars since then. They were
not widely used clinically until the 1930s when they were marketed as
Benzedrine inhalers for relief of nasal congestion. When their
psychostimulant effects were noted, these drugs were used to treat sleepiness
associated with narcolepsy. They have been classified as controlled drugs
because of their rapid onset, immediate behavioral effects, and propensity to
develop tolerance, which leads to the risk of abuse and dependence in
vulnerable individuals. State and federal agencies regulate their manufacture,
distribution, and use. In 2005, pemoline was withdrawn from the market
because of significant risks of treatment-emergent hepatotoxicity.
Sympathomimetics have been widely used in persons with ADHD and
narcolepsy because no equally effective agents have been available. They
have also been found useful in treating certain cognitive disorders that result
in secondary depression or profound apathy (e.g., AIDS, multiple sclerosis,




<<<PAGE 2152>>>

poststroke depression, dementia, closed head injury) as well as in the
augmentation of antidepressant medications in specific treatment-resistant
depressions.
Atomoxetine is included in this section because it is used to treat ADHD,
even though it is not a psychostimulant.
Pharmacologic Actions
All of these drugs are well absorbed from the GI tract. Amphetamine
(Adderall) and dextroamphetamine (Dexedrine, Dextrostat) reach peak
plasma concentrations in 2 to 3 hours and have a half-life of about 6 hours,
thereby necessitating once- or twice-daily dosing. Methylphenidate is
available in immediate-release (Ritalin), sustainedrelease (Ritalin SR), and extended-release (Concerta) formulations.
Immediate-release methylphenidate reaches peak plasma concentrations in 1
to 2 hours and has a short half-life of 2 to 3 hours, thereby necessitating
multiple-daily dosing. The sustained-release formulation reaches peak plasma
concentrations in 4 to 5 hours and doubles the effective half-life of
methylphenidate. The extended-release formulation reaches peak plasma
concentrations in 6 to 8 hours and is designed to be effective for 12 hours in
once-daily dosing. Dexmethylphenidate (Focalin) reaches peak plasma
concentration in about 3 hours and is prescribed twice daily.
Lisdexamfetamine dimesylate, also known as L-lysine D-amphetamine
(Vyvanse), is an amphetamine prodrug. In this formulation,
dextroamphetamine is coupled with the amino acid L-lysine.
Lisdexamfetamine becomes active upon cleavage of the lysine portion of the
molecule by enzymes in the red blood cells. This results in the gradual
release of dextroamphetamine into the bloodstream. Apart from having an
extended duration of action, this formulation reduces its abuse potential. It is
the only prodrug of its kind. Lisdexamfetamine is indicated for the treatment
of ADHD in children 6 years and up and in adults as an integral part of a total
treatment program that may include other measures (i.e., psychological,
educational, social). The safety and efficacy of lisdexamfetamine dimesylate
in patients 3 to 5 years old has not been established. In contrast to Adderall,
which contains approximately 75 percent dextroamphetamine and 25 percent
levoamphetamine, lisdexamfetamine is a single, dextro-enantiomer




<<<PAGE 2162>>>

Vyvanse

Adderall IR

Dexedrine

70 mg

30 mg

22.5 mg

50 mg

20 mg

15 mg

30 mg

10 mg

7.5 mg

XR, extended release; IR, immediate-release.

Persons with ADHD can take immediate-release methylphenidate at 8 AM,
12 noon, and 4 PM. Dextroamphetamine, Adderall, sustainedrelease methylphenidate, or 18 mg of extended-release methylphenidate may
be taken once at 8 AM. The starting dose of methylphenidate ranges from 2.5
mg of regular to 20 mg of the sustained-release formulation. If this is
inadequate, it may be increased to a maximum dose of 80 mg in children and
90 mg daily in adults. The dosage of dextroamphetamine is 2.5 to 40 mg a
day up to 0.5 mg/kg a day.
The starting dosage of modafinil is 200 mg in the morning in medically
healthy individuals and 100 mg in the morning in persons with hepatic
impairment. Some persons take a second 100- or 200-mg dose in the
afternoon. The maximum recommended daily dosage is 400 mg, although
dosages of 600 to 1,200 mg a day have been used safely. Adverse effects
become prominent at dosages greater than 400 mg a day. Compared with
amphetamine-like drugs, modafinil promotes wakefulness but produces less
attentiveness and less irritability. Some persons with excessive daytime
sleepiness extend the activity of the morning modafinil dose with an
afternoon dose of methylphenidate. Armodafinil is virtually identical to
modafinil but is dosed differently, the dosing range being 50 to 250 mg daily.

ATOMOXETINE (STRATTERA)
Atomoxetine is the first nonstimulant drug to be approved by the FDA as a
treatment of ADHD in children, adolescents, and adults. It is included in this
chapter because it shares this indication with the stimulants described earlier.
Pharmacologic Actions
Atomoxetine is believed to produce a therapeutic effect through selective




<<<PAGE 2163>>>

inhibition of the presynaptic norepinephrine transporter. It is well absorbed
after oral administration and is minimally affected by food. High-fat meals
may decrease the rate but not the extent of absorption. Maximum plasma
concentrations are reached after approximately 1 to 2 hours. At therapeutic
concentrations, 98 percent of atomoxetine in plasma is bound to protein,
mainly albumin. Atomoxetine has a half-life of approximately 5 hours and is
metabolized principally by the CYP2D6 pathway. Poor metabolizers of this
compound reach a fivefold higher area under the curve and fivefold higher
peak plasma concentration than normal or extensive metabolizers. This
variation is critical to consider in patients receiving medications that inhibit
the CYP2D6 enzyme. For example, the antidepressant-like pharmacology of
atomoxetine has led to its use as an add-on to SSRIs or other antidepressants.
Drugs such as fluoxetine (Prozac), paroxetine (Paxil), and bupropion
(Wellbutrin) are CYP2D6 inhibitors and may raise atomoxetine levels.
Therapeutic Indications
Atomoxetine is used for the treatment of ADHD. It should be considered for
use in patients who find stimulants too activating or who experience other
intolerable side effects. Because atomoxetine has no abuse potential, it is a
reasonable choice in the treatment of patients with both ADHD and substance
abuse, patients who complain of ADHD symptoms but are suspected of
seeking stimulant drugs, and patients who are in recovery.
Atomoxetine may enhance cognition when used to treat patients with
schizophrenia. It may also be used as an alternative or add-on to
antidepressants in patients who fail to respond to standard therapies.
Precautions and Adverse Reactions
Common side effects of atomoxetine include abdominal discomfort,
decreased appetite with resulting weight loss, sexual dysfunction, dizziness,
vertigo, irritability, and mood swings. Minor increases in BP and heart rate
have also been observed. There have been cases of severe liver injury in a
small number of patients taking atomoxetine. The drug should be
discontinued in patients with jaundice (yellowing of the skin or whites of the
eyes, itching) or laboratory evidence of liver injury. Atomoxetine should not
be taken at the same time as, or within 2 weeks of taking, an MAOI or by




<<<PAGE 2164>>>

patients with narrow-angle glaucoma.
The effects of overdose greater than twice the maximum recommended
daily dose in humans are unknown. No specific information is available on
the treatment of overdose with atomoxetine.
Dosage and Clinical Guidelines
Atomoxetine is available as 10-, 18-, 25-, 40-, and 60-mg capsules. In
children and adolescents who weigh up to 70 kg, atomoxetine should be
initiated at a total daily dose of approximately 0.5 mg/kg and increased after a
minimum of 3 days to a target total daily dose of approximately 1.2 mg/kg,
administered either as a single daily dose in the morning or as evenly divided
doses in the morning and late afternoon or early evening. The total daily dose
in smaller children and adolescents should not exceed 1.4 mg/kg or 100 mg,
whichever is less. Dosing of children and adolescents who weigh more than
70 kg and adults should start at a total daily dose of 40 mg and then be
increased after a minimum of 3 days to a target total daily dose of
approximately 80 mg. The doses can be administered either as a single daily
dose in the morning or as evenly divided doses in the morning and late
afternoon or early evening. After 2 to 4 additional weeks, the dose may be
increased to a maximum of 100 mg in patients who have not achieved an
optimal response. The maximum recommended total daily dose in children
and adolescents over 70 kg and adults is 100 mg.

21.7 Drugs Used to Treat Substance Use
Disorders
OPIOID RECEPTOR AGONISTS
Opioid receptor agonists are a structurally diverse group of compounds that
are used for pain management. These drugs are also called narcotics.
Although highly effective as analgesics, they often cause dependence and are
frequently diverted for recreational use. Commonly used opioid agonists for
pain relief include morphine, hydromorphone (Dilaudid), codeine,
meperidine (Demerol), oxycodone (OxyContin), buprenorphine (Buprenex),




<<<PAGE 2280>>>

the efficacy and safety of ramelteon in subjects with chronic insomnia. J
Clin Sleep Med. 2007;3(5):495.
Stimulants
Adler LA, Sutton VK, Moore RJ, Dietrich AP, Reimherr FW. Quality of life
assessment in adult patients with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder
treated with atomoxetine. J Clin Psychopharmacol. 2006;26(6):648–652.
Aiken CB. Pramipexole in psychiatry: a systematic review of the literature. J
Clin Psychiatry. 2007;68(8):1230–1236.
Amiri S, Mohammadi MR, Mohammadi M, Nouroozinejad GH, Kahbazi M.
Modafinil as a treatment for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder in
children and adolescents: a double-blind, randomized clinical trial. Prog
Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry. 2008;32(1):145–149.
Bangs ME, Emsile GJ, Spencer TJ, Ramsey JL, Carlson C. Efficacy and
safety of atomoxetine in adolescents with attention-deficit/hyperactivity
disorder and major depression. J Child Adolesc Psychopharmacol.
2007;17(4):407–420.
Barone P, Scazella L, Marconi R, Antonini A, Morgante L. Pramipexole
versus sertraline in the treatment of depression in Parkinson’s disease: a
national multicenter parallel-group randomized study. J Neuro.
2006;253(5):601–607.
Cheng JY, Chen RY, Ko JS, Ng EM. Efficacy and safety of atomoxetine for
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder in children and adolescents-metaanalysis and meta-regression analysis. Psychopharmacology (Berl).
2007;194(2):197.
Eliyahu U, Berlin S, Hadad E, Heled Y, Moran DS. Psychostimulants and
military operations. Mil Med. 2007;172(4):383.
Fava M, Thase ME, DeBattista C, Doghramji K, Arora S. Modafinil
augmentation of selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor therapy in MDD
partial responders with persistent fatigue and sleepiness. Ann Clin
Psychiatry. 2007;19(3):153.
Fawcett J. Sympathomimetics and dopamine receptor agonists. In: Sadock
BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook
of Psychiatry. 9th ed. Vol. 2. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins; 2009:3241.
Fleckenstein AE, Volz TJ, Riddle EL, Gibb JW, Hanson GR. New insights




<<<PAGE 2281>>>

into the mechanism of action of amphetamines. Annu Rev Pharmacol
Toxicol. 2007;47:
681–698.
Frye MA, Grunze H, Suppes T, McElroy SL, Keck PE Jr. A placebocontrolled evaluation of adjunctive modafinil in the treatment of bipolar
depression. Am J Psychiatry. 2007;164(8):1242–1249.
Geller D, Donnelly C, Lopez F, Rubin R, Newcorn J. Atomoxetine treatment
for pediatric patients with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder with
comorbid anxiety disorder. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry.
2007;46(9):1119–1127.
Hirshkowitz M, Black J. Effect of adjunctive modafinil on wakefulness and
quality of life in patients with excessive sleepiness-associated obstructive
sleep apnoea/hypopnoea syndrome: a 12-month, open-label extensions
study. CNS Drugs. 2007;21(5):407–416.
Makris AP, Rush CR, Frederich RC, Taylor AC, Kelly TH. Behavioral and
subjective effects of d-amphetamine and modafinil in healthy adults. Exp
Clin Psychopharmacol. 2007;15(2):123–133.
McElroy SL, Guerdjikova A, Kotwal R, Weige JA, Nelson EB. Atomoxetine
in the treatment of binge-eating disorder: a randomized placebo-controlled
trial. J Clin Psychiatry. 2007;68(3):390–398.
Minzenberg MJ, Carter CS. Modafinil: a review of neurochemical actions
and effects on cognition. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2008;97(7):1477.
Pivonello R, De Martino MC, Cappabianca P, De Leo M, Faggiano A,
Lombardi G, Hofland LJ, Lamberts SWJ, Colao A. The medical treatment
of Cushing’s disease: effectiveness of chronic treatment with the dopamine
agonist cabergoline in patients unsuccessfully treated by surgery. J Clin
Endocrinology Metabolism. 2009;94(1):223–230.
Pizzagalli DA, Evins AE, Schetter EC, Frank MJ, Pajtas PE, Santesso DL,
Culhane M. Single dose of a dopamine agonist impairs reinforcement
learning in humans: behavioral evidence from a laboratory-based measure
of reward responsiveness. Psychopharmacology. 2008;196(2):221–232.
Quintana H, Cherlin EA, Duesenberg DA, Bangs ME, Ramsey JL. Transition
from methylphenidate or amphetamine to atomoxetine in children and
adolescents with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder: a preliminary
tolerability and efficacy study. Clin Ther. 2007;29(6):1168–1177.
Rothenhausler HB, Ehrentraut S, von Degenfeld G, Weis M, Tichy M.




<<<PAGE 2282>>>

Treatment of depression with methylphenidate in patients difficult to wean
from mechanical ventilation in the intensive care unit. J Clin Psychiatry.
2007;61(10):750.
Scott JC, Woods SP, Matt GE, Meyer RA, Heaton RK. Neurocognitive
effects of methamphetamine: a critical review with meta-analysis.
Neuropsychol Rev. 2007;17(3):275–297.
Weisler RH. Review of long-acting stimulants in the treatment of attention
deficit hyperactivity disorder. Exper Opin Pharmacother. 2007;8(6):745–
758.
Wernicke JF, Holdridge KC, Jin L, Edison T, Zhang S. Seizure risk in
patients with attention-deficit-hyperactivity disorder treated with
atomoxetine. Dev Med Child Neurol. 2007;49(7):498–502.
Drugs Used to Treat Substance Use Disorders
Anton RF, O’Malley SS, Ciraulo DA, Cisler RA, Couper D. Combined
pharmacotherapies
and
behavioral
interventions
for
alcohol
dependence:the COMBINE study: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA.
2006;295(17):2003–2017.
Arnsten AFT, Li B. Neurobiology of executive functions: catecholamine
influences on prefrontal cortical functions. Biol Psychiatry. 2005;57:1377.
Biederman J, Melmed RD, Patel A, McBurnett K, Konow J, Lyne A, Scherer
N. A randomized, double blind, placebo-controlled study of guanfacine
extended release in children and adolescents with attentiondeficit/hyperactivity disorder. Pediatrics. 2008;121(1):e73–e84.
Carroll KM, Ball SA, Nich C, O’Connor PG, Eagan D. Targeting behavioral
therapies to enhance naltrexone treatment of opioid dependence: efficacy
of contingency management and significant other involvement. Arch Gen
Psychiatry. 2001;58:755–761.
Center for Substance Abuse Treatment. Medication-Assisted Treatment for
Opioid Addiction in Opioid Treatment Programs. Treatment Improvement
Protocol (TIP) Series 43. DHHS Publication No. (SMA) 05–4048.
Rockville, MD: Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services
Administration; 2005.
Collins ED, Kleber HD, Whittington RA, Heitler NE. Anesthesia-assisted vs.
buprenorphine- or clonidine-assisted heroin detoxification and naltrexone
induction: a randomized trial. JAMA. 2005;294(8):903–913.




<<<PAGE 3604>>>

Associations
exploration of, 15
studies, 990
Associative learning, 1023
Associative visual agnosia, 927
Astereognosis, 925
Astrocytes, 50, 924
Astrotactin, 949
Ataque de Nervios, 1053
Ataxia, 21
Atomoxetine, 685–686
for ADHD management, 686
dosage and clinical guidelines, 686
effect on cognition, 686
pharmacologic actions, 686
precautions and adverse reactions, 686
therapeutic indications, 686
for tic disorder, 161
Atopognosia, 88
Atracurium, 733
Ativan, see Lorazepam
Atropine sulfate, 619
Attachment, 891–892, 1012t
anxiety, 1012–1013
defined, 1011
development, 1011
disorders of, 1013
fathers and, 892
phases of, 1011–1012
strange situation, 1012t
theory, 167, 1011–1013
child maltreatment, 1013
psychiatric applications, 1013
types of, 892t
Attachment and Biobehavioral Catch-up (ABC) intervention, 170
Attention, assessment of, 54
Attention cathexis, 1060




<<<PAGE 3605>>>

Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), 131–141, 932
adult manifestations of, 139–140
course and prognosis, 140–141
diagnosis and clinical features, 140, 140t
differential diagnosis, 140
epidemiology, 141
treatment, 141
atomoxetine for, 686
bupropion for, 635–636
clinical features, 132
course and prognosis, 135
diagnosis, 133, 134t
differential diagnosis, 134–135
DSM-5 on, 131–132, 134t
epidemiology, 138
etiology, 138–139
developmental factors, 139
genetic factors, 139
neuroanatomical aspects, 139
neurochemical factors, 139
neurophysiologic factors, 139
psychosocial factors, 139
guanfacine for, 695
intellectual disability and, 98, 99
mania and, 134
Multimodal Treatment Study of Children with ADHD, 138
pathology and laboratory examination, 133–134
psychiatric and medical history, 133
sympathomimetics for, 682, 683, 684
treatment
pharmacotherapy, 135–137, 136t
psychosocial interventions, 138
unspecified ADHD, 135
Attenuated psychosis syndrome (APS), 210–211
Attribution theory, 785
Attunement, concept of, 937
Audiogram, 126




<<<PAGE 3749>>>

etiology
genetic factors, 308
learning and conditioning, 308
sociocultural factors, 308
mood disorder, 305
network therapy, 306
obsessive-compulsive disorder, 305–306
pathology, 307–308
pharmacologic treatment, 306–307
psychosocial therapies, 306
psychotic disorder, 305
sexual dysfunction, 306
sleep disorder, 306
delirium, 305
Stimulant use disorder, 304
Stimulus control therapy, for insomnia, 511, 511t
St. John’s wort, 713
Strattera. See Atomoxetine
Stress
chronic, 984–985
human responses to, 984–985
illness and, 984
pain perception and, 972, 976
Stress-induced analgesia, 976
Stroke, 593
Structured Clinical Interview for DSM (SCID), 31
Structured interactional group psychotherapy, 759
Structured psychotherapy for adolescents responding to chronic stress
(SPARCS), 173
Strychnine, 963
Stuttering. See Child-onset fluency disorder
Subacute sclerosing panencephalitis, 106, 255–256
Subcaudate tractotomy, 741
outcome with, 742
Subcortical arteriosclerotic encephalopathy. See Binswanger disease
Subgranular zone (SGZ), 941, 953
Subjective well-being and mental health, 1038–1039


