<<<PAGE 511>>>

affinity for dopamine D2 and serotonin 5-HT2 receptors, is the most wellstudied atypical antipsychotic in the treatment of tics. There is considerable
evidence for its efficacy. Multiple randomized, controlled studies in children
and adolescents have shown favorable results compared to placebo as well as
in head-to-head studies with the typical antipsychotics haloperidol and
pimozide. Risperidone was associated with fewer adverse events compared to
typical antipsychotics; however, it can cause weight gain, metabolic side
effects, and hyperprolactinemia. In a randomized, double-blind, parallelgroup study of Tourette disorder comparing risperidone to pimozide,
risperidone showed superiority in reducing comorbid obsessive-compulsive
symptoms as well as reducing tics. In other randomized clinical trials,
risperidone reduced tics in children, adolescents, and adults with mean daily
doses of 2.5 mg with a range of 1 to 6 mg.
Haloperidol and pimozide are the two most well-investigated and FDAapproved antipsychotic agents in the treatment of Tourette disorder.
However, atypical antipsychotics such as risperidone are often first-line
agents due to their safer side-effect profiles. Both haloperidol and pimozide
are efficacious in multiple randomized clinical trials in the treatment of
Tourette disorder. Both haloperidol and pimozide present significant risks for
extrapyramidal side effects; in a long-term naturalistic follow-up study,
haloperidol produces more significant acute dyskinesia and dystonia
compared to pimozide.
A third typical antipsychotic, fluphenazine, has been used in the United
States for many years in the treatment of tic disorders in the absence of robust
data supporting its efficacy. A small controlled study of fluphenazine,
trifluphenazine, and haloperidol found similar reductions in tics; however,
haloperidol has more extrapyramidal side effects and more sedation. The
frequency of sedation, dystonia, and akathisia of typical antipsychotics,
probably due to their predominant dopaminergic blockade in the nigrostriatal
pathways, limits their use and increases the appeal of the atypical
antipsychotics. Risperidone and pimozide had equal efficacy in one study of
children, adolescents, and adults with Tourette disorder.
Aripiprazole has become a pharmacologic agent of interest in the treatment
of tic disorders due to its mode of action; in addition to its D2 receptor
antagonistic actions, aripiprazole is also a partial D2 and 5-HT1A receptor




<<<PAGE 629>>>

separation is
involved

overly
inhibited

eager to please,
peers sought out
for reassurance

Sleep

Reluctance or
May
refusal to sleep
experience
away from
insomnia
home or not
near
attachment
figure

Often difficulty falling
asleep

Psychophysiological
symptoms

Stomachaches,
May exhibit
Stomachaches,
headaches
blushing,
nausea, lump in
nausea,
inadequate
the throat,
vomiting,
eye contact,
shortness
palpitations,
soft voice,
breath, dizziness,
dizziness when
or rigid
palpitations when
anticipating
posture
anticipating
separation
performing an
activity

Differential diagnosis

GAD, Soc AD,
GAD, SAD,
SAD, Soc AD,
major
major
attentiondepressive
depressive
deficit/hyperactivity
disorder, panic
disorder,
disorder,
disorder with
dysthymic
obsessiveagoraphobia,
disorder,
compulsive
PTSD,
selective
disorder, major
oppositional
mutism,
depressive
defiant disorder
agoraphobia
disorder, PTSD

GAD, generalized anxiety disorder; Soc AD, social anxiety disorder; SAD, separation anxiety
disorder; PTSD, posttraumatic stress disorder.
Adapted from Sidney Werkman, M.D.

When depressive disorders occur in children, we should evaluate for
possible comorbidities, such as separation anxiety disorder, as well. We can




<<<PAGE 1006>>>

be needed to screen for these substances. The differential diagnosis should
also include hyperthyroidism and pheochromocytoma.
Table 4-33
Differential Diagnosis for Caffeine-Related Disorders
Generalized anxiety disorder
Panic disorder with or without agoraphobia
Bipolar II disorder
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)
Sleep disorders
Caffeine Intoxication
After the ingesting 50 to 100 mg of caffeine, the common symptoms can be
pleasant (e.g., alertness) or only mildly annoying (diuresis). As the dose
increases, the symptoms become more concerning; Table 4-34 lists these.
Caffeine intoxication generally occurs above 250 mg. The annual incidence
of intoxication is about 10 percent of the population. Above 10 g of caffeine
—almost impossible to achieve with usual caffeinated beverages but possible
with pills or other supplements—caffeine can be fatal.
Table 4-34
Symptoms and Signs of Caffeine Use
Mild to
Alertness A mild A sense of
Diuresis Cardiac
Moderate
sense
improved
muscle
Use (50–
of
verbal and
stimulation
100 mg)
wellmotor
being
performance




<<<PAGE 1287>>>

Patients with severe anxiety can become confused. They can have difficulty
focusing their attention, and as a result, may have trouble with recall.
Usually, anxiety does not reach a level where it significantly affects insight
or judgment. However, patients can become selective in their interpretation of
the environment, focusing on specific aspects and neglecting others to prove
that they are justified in their reactions.
Although the patients do not tend to talk about suicidal ideation, they are at
increased risk of committing suicide. Some studies have found that the
lifetime risk of suicide in persons with panic disorder is higher than it is in
persons with no mental disorder.
Presentation in Special Populations
Anxiety has many possible disorders, and different populations can present
differently. For example, children or the elderly may present more with
somatic symptoms than adults.
Certain cultural groups may have syndromes unique to their group, some
of which represent culturally specific understandings of their body. Examples
include the multiple anxiety syndromes related to the fear of “wind attacks”
in Cambodians, or the syndrome of Ataque de Nervios (attack of nerves) in
Puerto Rican and Dominican patients. In most cases, anxiety symptoms do
not differ from those in other cultures. However, the emphasis may be on the
specific ones relevant to beliefs about the underlying cause. In most cases, a
full history and examination can elucidate the problem. It is often helpful to
seek a cultural consultation for an understanding of the particular syndrome.
In the past, there have been some broad overgeneralizations about different
ethnic or cultural groups. However, these often reflect a bias and are usually
not helpful.

DIAGNOSIS
Within this category, there are several disorders, including panic disorder
(with and without agoraphobia), agoraphobia (without a history of panic
disorder), specific phobia, social phobia, and generalized anxiety disorder.
Panic Disorder




<<<PAGE 1291>>>

Agoraphobia refers to a fear of or anxiety regarding places from which
escape might be difficult. It can be the most disabling of the phobias because
it can significantly interfere with a person’s ability to function in work and
social situations outside the home. Although agoraphobia often coexists with
panic disorder, in that patients are afraid to leave the safety of home lest they
have a panic attack in a public place, DSM-5 considers agoraphobia a
separate condition that may or may not be comorbid with panic disorder.
Often patients with agoraphobia alone still have some measure of anxiety,
“panic-like” symptoms, although those symptoms may not reach the level of
an actual panic attack.
Mrs. W was a 33-year-old married woman. She visited an anxiety clinic,
reporting that she felt like she was having a heart attack whenever she left
her home. Her disorder began 8 years earlier while attending a yoga class
when she suddenly noticed a dramatic increase in her heartbeat, felt
stabbing pains in her chest, and had difficulty breathing. She began
sweating and trembling and felt dizzy. She immediately went to the
emergency department, where they performed an electrocardiogram. No
abnormalities were detected. Over the next few months, Mrs. W
experienced similar attacks of 15 to 30 minutes’ duration about four
times per month. She often sought medical advice after each episode, and
each time no physical abnormalities were detected. After experiencing a
few of these attacks, Mrs. W became afraid of having an attack away
from home and would not leave her home unless necessary, in which case
she needed to have her cell phone or be accompanied by someone. Even
so, she avoided crowded places such as malls, movie theaters, and banks,
where rapid escape is sometimes blocked. Her symptoms and avoidance
dominated her life, although she was aware that they were irrational and
excessive. She experienced mild depression and restlessness and had
difficulty sleeping.
Patients with agoraphobia rigidly avoid situations in which it would be
challenging to obtain help. They prefer to be accompanied by a friend or a
family member when leaving home, especially if their destination is crowded
or closed-in. Severely affected patients may simply refuse to leave the house.




<<<PAGE 1292>>>

Patients may be terrified that they are going “crazy.”
Table 8-2 compares the different approaches to diagnosing agoraphobia.
Several situations might cause anxiety, some involving confining spaces
(public transportation, elevators, stores), open spaces (parks, shopping
centers), or crowds. What they have in common is the fact that a person is
away from home and safety and cannot quickly return to it.
Specific Phobia
The term phobia refers to excessive fear of a specific object, circumstance, or
situation. A specific phobia is an intense, persisting fear of an object or
situation, considered dangerous. The fear should be out of proportion to the
actual threat. The diagnosis of specific phobia requires the development of
intense anxiety, even to the point of panic, when exposed to the feared object.
Persons with specific phobias may anticipate harm, such as being bitten by a
dog, or may panic at the thought of losing control; for instance, if they fear
elevators, they may also worry about fainting after the door closes.
Table 8-2
Agoraphobia
DSM-5
Diagnostic name Agoraphobia
Duration

≥6 mo

Symptoms

Fear or anxiety from:
Public transportation
Open spaces
Confined spaces
Being in a line or in a crowd
Being alone outside of home
Avoidance of the situations, due
to:
Fear of having a panic attack
while there
Or, no access to a companion

ICD-10
Agoraphobia

Fear of:
Leaving
home
Going to a
public
place
Going to a
crowded
place
Traveling
alone




<<<PAGE 1300>>>

Duration

≤6 mo

Symptoms

Excessive
Persistent anxiety
anxiety/worry
Anxiety characterized by:
Difficulty controlling/
• Shaking
managing worry
• Muscle tension
Anxiety characterized
• Sweating
by:
• Lightheadedness
• Restlessness
• Palpitations
• Fatigue
• GI symptoms
• Poor concentration
• Irritability
• Muscle tension
• Insomnia

Required number
of symptoms

First two criteria and
3+ of the specific
symptoms

Psychosocial
consequences
of symptoms

Marked distress
and/or impairment

Exclusions (not
result of):

• Another mental
disorder
• Substance use
• Another medical
condition

Anxiety not associated
with an object, event,
or situation

Other Psychiatric Disorders
The differential diagnosis for agoraphobia includes all the psychiatric
disorders that can cause anxiety or depression. A panic disorder is the most
common cause of agoraphobia, and a separate diagnosis of agoraphobia is not
necessary. Other disorders include major depressive disorder, schizophrenia,
paranoid personality disorder, avoidant personality disorder, and dependent
personality disorder.




<<<PAGE 1302>>>

The attack often begins with 10 minutes of rapidly increasing symptoms.
The significant mental symptoms are extreme fear and a sense of impending
death and doom. Patients usually cannot name the source of their fear; they
may feel confused and have trouble concentrating. The physical signs often
include tachycardia, palpitations, dyspnea, and sweating. Patients often try to
leave whatever situation they are in to seek help. The attack generally lasts 20
to 30 minutes and rarely more than an hour.
Panic disorder usually has its onset in late adolescence or early adulthood,
although onset during childhood, early adolescence, and midlife do occur.
Some data implicate increased psychosocial stressors with the onset of panic
disorder, although in most cases, there are no identifiable psychosocial
stressors.
Panic disorder is a chronic disorder, although its course is variable, both
among patients and within a single patient. The available long-term follow-up
studies of panic disorder are difficult to interpret because they have not
controlled for the effects of treatment. Nevertheless, about 30 to 40 percent of
patients seem to be symptom-free at long-term follow-up, about 50 percent
have symptoms that are sufficiently mild not to affect their lives significantly,
and about 10 to 20 percent continue to have significant symptoms.
After the first one or two panic attacks, patients may be relatively
unconcerned about their condition; with repeated attacks, however, the
symptoms may become a significant concern. Between attacks, patients may
have anticipatory anxiety about having another attack. Patients may attempt
to keep the panic attacks secret and thereby cause their families and friends
concern about unexplained changes in behavior. The frequency and severity
of the attacks can fluctuate. Panic attacks can occur several times in a day or
less than once a month. Excessive intake of caffeine or nicotine can
exacerbate the symptoms.
When agoraphobia is part of a panic disorder, improving panic symptoms
often also improves agoraphobia. For rapid and complete reduction of
agoraphobia, behavior therapy is useful. Agoraphobia without a history of
panic disorder is often incapacitating and chronic, and depressive disorders
and alcohol use disorder often complicate its course.
The presence of comorbid disorders, particularly alcohol and substance use
disorders, complicates the course of anxiety disorders. Patients with good
premorbid functioning and symptoms of brief duration tend to have a




<<<PAGE 1306>>>

recommended
MAOIs

Insufficient
evidence

Second line

Second line

RIMA-Moclobemide Insufficient
evidence

Insufficient
evidence

Second Line

Other Psychotropics Second line
—Agomelatine,
Buspirone,
Mirtazapine

Second line

Second line

Benzodiazepines

Second line

Second line

Second line

Atypical
Second line
Antipsychotics—
Quetiapine

Insufficient
evidence

Not
recommended

Anticonvulsant—
Pregabalin

Insufficient
evidence

Second line

Second line

Note: Beta-adrenergic blocking agents are recommended only for performance anxiety.
RIMA, reversible monoamine oxidase inhibitor; GAD, generalized anxiety disorder; PD, panic
disorder; SAD, social anxiety disorder.

In the case of specific phobia, psychotherapies, particularly behavioral
therapies, are the first-line choice. SSRIs may be helpful, although there are
few studies of SSRIs for this disorder.
For agoraphobia, the main goal of pharmacotherapy is to treat the panic
attacks that are usually comorbid. Early studies did not support the use of
medications for “pure” agoraphobia; however, there has been little research
since.
Psychosocial Therapies
There is strong support for a variety of psychosocial therapies for anxiety
disorders, including cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT), behavioral
therapies, and interpersonal therapy. Studies of CBT suggest it has a
substantial effect on generalized anxiety disorder, panic disorder, and social
anxiety disorder, although this evidence is tempered by concerns about




<<<PAGE 1308>>>

feared stimulus (e.g., climbing to increasingly higher floors in a building for a
patient with a fear of heights) while practicing relaxation techniques until the
patient masters each successive step.
Interpersonal Psychotherapy. There is good evidence for interpersonal
psychotherapy, particularly interpersonal skills training for social anxiety
disorder. The assumption is that such patients have interpersonal deficits that
contribute to their anxiety and lack the skills to interact with others
effectively. The result is that patients experience more of the “punishments”
and less of the rewards from social interaction than most other people.
Virtual Therapy. Computer programs exist that allow us to treat a variety of
anxiety disorders, including agoraphobia, specific phobia, and social anxiety
disorder. As an example, patients with agoraphobia may experience a virtual
environment in which they are in a crowded space (e.g., a supermarket). As
they identify with the avatars in repeated computer sessions, they can learn to
master their anxiety until they are ready to try the exposure in real life. This
approach is particularly useful for situations that are not easily reproduced
inside or near a clinician’s office (i.e., flying).
Supportive Psychotherapy. Supportive psychotherapy involves the use
of psychodynamic concepts and a therapeutic alliance to promote adaptive
coping. Adaptive defenses are encouraged and strengthened, and maladaptive
ones are discouraged. The therapist assists in reality testing and may offer
behavioral advice. Although lacking empirical support, clinicians frequently
incorporate some degree of supportive psychotherapy as an adjunct to
medication.
Insight-Oriented Psychotherapy. In insight-oriented psychotherapy, the
goal is to increase the patient’s development of insight into psychologic
conflicts that, if unresolved, can manifest as symptomatic behavior. For a
time, it was the classic treatment for many types of anxiety, with the
assumption that the anxiety represented an underlying psychodynamic
conflict. Some studies suggest that psychodynamic psychotherapy can help
decrease anxiety symptoms, and may have a lasting effect. However, the
studies tend to have methodologic problems, and we lack the large,




<<<PAGE 1324>>>

Klein DF. Historical aspects of anxiety. Dialogues Clin Neurosci.
2002;4(3):295–304.
Lovibond PF, Lovibond SH. The structure of negative emotional states:
comparison of the Depression Anxiety Stress Scales (DASS) with the Beck
Depression and Anxiety Inventories. Behav Res Ther. 1995;33(3):335–
343.
Marteau TM, Bekker H. The development of a six-item short-form of the
state scale of the Spielberger State-Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI). Br J
Clin Psychol. 1992;31(3):301–306.
McLean CP, Asnaani A, Litz BT, Hofmann SG. Gender differences in
anxiety disorders: Prevalence, course of illness, comorbidity and burden of
illness. J Psychiatr Res. 2011;45:1027–1035.
Meyerbroker K, Morina N, Kerkhof G, Emmelkamp PM. Virtual reality
exposure treatment of agoraphobia: A comparison of computer automatic
virtual environment and head-mounted display. Stud Health Technol
Inform. 2011;167:51–56.
Naragon-Gainey K, Gallagher MW, Brown TA. A longitudinal examination
of psychosocial impairment across the anxiety disorders. Psycholog Med.
2013;43:1475.
Perna G, Daccò S, Menotti R, Caldirola D. Antianxiety medications for the
treatment of complex agoraphobia: Pharmacological interventions for a
behavioral condition. Neuropsychiatr Dis Treat. 2011;7:621–637.
Practice Guideline for the Treatment of Patients With Panic Disorder. In:
APA Practice Guidelines for the Treatment of Psychiatric Disorders:
Comprehensive Guidelines and Guideline Watches [Internet]. 1st ed.
Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Association; 2006 [cited July 26,
2020]. Available from: http://www.psychiatryonline.com/content.aspx?
aID=51396
Sanchez C, Reines EH, Montgomery SA. A comparative review of
escitalopram, paroxetine, and sertraline: Are they all alike? Int Clin
Psychopharmacol. 2014;29(4):185–196.
Shear MK, Vander Bilt J, Rucci P, Endicott J, Lydiard B, Otto MW, Pollack
MH, Chandler L, Williams J, Ali A, Frank DM. Reliability and validity of
a structured interview guide for the Hamilton Anxiety Rating Scale (SIGHA). Depress Anxiety. 2001;13(4):166–178.
Spitzer RL, Kroenke K, Williams JBW, Löwe B. A brief measure for




<<<PAGE 1804>>>

associated euphoria, and functional impairment in a manic or hypomanic
episode.
Avoidant Personality Disorder
Avoidant personality disorder is complicated to distinguish from social
anxiety disorder. In social anxiety disorder, specific situations, rather than
interpersonal contact in general, are avoided. They may co-occur. Panic
disorder with agoraphobia also manifests avoidance, but usually after the
onset of panic attacks.
Patients with schizoid and schizotypal personality disorders may be
indistinguishable from those with avoidant personality disorder. However,
patients with avoidant personality disorder desire social interaction, unlike
patients with schizoid personality disorder, who want to be alone. Patients
with avoidant personality disorder are not as demanding, irritable, or
unpredictable as those with borderline and histrionic personality disorders.
Avoidant personality disorder and dependent personality disorder are similar.
Patients with dependent personality disorder are presumed to have a greater
fear of being abandoned or unloved than those with avoidant personality
disorder, but the clinical picture may be indistinguishable.
Dependent Personality Disorder
The traits of dependence occur in many psychiatric disorders, so the
differential diagnosis is difficult. Dependence is a prominent factor in
patients with histrionic and borderline personality disorders. However, those
with dependent personality disorder usually have a long-term relationship
with one person rather than a series of persons on whom they are dependent,
and they do not tend to be overly manipulative. Dependent behavior can also
occur in patients with agoraphobia, panic disorder, and depressive disorders,
but these patients tend to have a high level of overt anxiety, panic, or
depression, respectively.
Obsessive-Compulsive Personality Disorder
When recurrent obsessions or compulsions are present, we should diagnose
an obsessive-compulsive disorder. Perhaps the most challenging distinction is
between outpatients with some obsessive-compulsive traits and those with an




<<<PAGE 1939>>>

Side Effects. Somnolence, headache, dizziness, nausea, and
lightheadedness are the most common adverse effects in patients taking
ziprasidone. The drug has almost no significant effects outside the CNS, is
associated with almost no weight gain, and does not cause sustained prolactin
elevation. Concerns about prolongation of the QTc complex have deterred
some clinicians from using ziprasidone as a first choice. The QTc interval has
been shown to increase in patients treated with 40 and 120 mg/day.
Ziprasidone is contraindicated in combination with other drugs known to
prolong the QTc interval. These include, but are not limited to, dofetilide,
sotalol, quinidine, other class IA and III antiarrhythmics, mesoridazine,
thioridazine,
chlorpromazine,
droperidol,
pimozide,
sparfloxacin,
gatifloxacin, moxifloxacin, halofantrine, mefloquine, pentamidine, arsenic
trioxide, levomethadyl acetate, dolasetron mesylate, probucol, and
tacrolimus. Ziprasidone should be avoided in patients with congenital long
QT syndrome and patients with a history of cardiac arrhythmias.
Aripiprazole (Abilify)
Aripiprazole is a potent 5-HT2A antagonist and is indicated for the treatment
of both schizophrenia and acute mania. It is also approved for the
augmentation of antidepressant agents in MDD. Aripiprazole is a D2
antagonist, but can also act as a partial D2 agonist. Partial D2 agonists
compete at D2 receptors for endogenous dopamine, thereby producing a
functional reduction of dopamine activity.
Indications. Aripiprazole is indicated for the treatment of schizophrenia.
Short-term, 4- to 6-week studies comparing aripiprazole with haloperidol and
risperidone in patients with schizophrenia and schizoaffective disorder have
shown comparable efficacy. Dosages of 15, 20, and 30 mg a day were found
to be effective. Long-term studies suggest that aripiprazole is effective as a
maintenance treatment at a daily dose of 15 to 30 mg.
Aripiprazole is also indicated for the acute and maintenance treatment of
manic and mixed episodes associated with bipolar I disorder. It is also used
as adjunctive therapy to either lithium or valproate for the acute treatment of
manic and mixed episodes associated with bipolar I disorder.
Aripiprazole is indicated for use as adjunctive therapy to antidepressants




<<<PAGE 1955>>>

Severe Agitation and Violent Behavior. Severely agitated and violent
patients, regardless of diagnosis, may be treated with DRAs. Symptoms such
as extreme irritability, lack of impulse control, severe hostility, gross
hyperactivity, and agitation respond to short-term treatment with these drugs.
Children with mental disabilities, especially those with profound intellectual
disabilities and autistic disorder, often have associated episodes of violence,
aggression, and agitation that respond to treatment with antipsychotic drugs;
however, the repeated administration of antipsychotics to control disruptive
behavior in children is controversial.
Tourette Disorder. DRAs are used to treat Tourette’s disorder, a
neurobehavioral disorder marked by motor and vocal tics. Haloperidol and
pimozide (Orap) are the drugs most frequently used, but other DRAs are also
useful. Some clinicians prefer to use clonidine (Catapres) for this disorder
because of its lower risk of neurologic side effects.
Borderline Personality Disorder. Patients with borderline personality
disorder who experience transient psychotic symptoms, such as perceptual
disturbances, suspiciousness, ideas of reference, and aggression, may need to
be treated with a DRA. This disorder is also associated with mood instability,
so patients should be evaluated for possible treatment with mood-stabilizing
agents.
Dementia and Delirium. About two-thirds of agitated, elderly patients
with various forms of dementia improve when given a DRA. Low doses of
high-potency drugs (e.g., 0.5 to 1 mg a day of haloperidol) are recommended.
DRAs are also used to treat psychotic symptoms and agitation associated
with delirium. The cause of the delirium needs to be determined because
toxic deliriums caused by anticholinergic agents can be exacerbated by lowpotency DRAs, which often have significant antimuscarinic activity.
Orthostasis, parkinsonism, and worsened cognition are the most problematic
side effects in this elderly population.
Substance-Induced Psychotic Disorder. Intoxication with cocaine,
amphetamines, alcohol, phencyclidine, or other drugs can cause psychotic
symptoms. Because these symptoms tend to be time-limited, it is preferable




<<<PAGE 1959>>>

intravenous (IV) infusion, repeated within 1 hour as necessary. Too much
physostigmine is dangerous, and symptoms of physostigmine toxicity include
hypersalivation and sweating. Atropine sulfate (0.5 mg) can reverse the
effects of physostigmine toxicity.
Cardiac Effects. The DRAs decrease cardiac contractility, disrupt enzyme
contractility in cardiac cells, increase circulating levels of catecholamines,
and prolong atrial and ventricular conduction time and refractory periods.
Low-potency DRAs, particularly the phenothiazines, are usually more
cardiotoxic than are high-potency drugs. One exception is haloperidol, which
has been linked to abnormal heart rhythm, ventricular arrhythmias, torsades
de pointes, and sudden death when injected IV. Pimozide, sulpiride, and
droperidol (a butyrophenone) also prolong the QTc interval and have been
associated with torsades de pointes and sudden death. In one study,
thioridazine was responsible for 28 (61 percent) of the 46 sudden
antipsychotic deaths. In 15 of these cases, it was the only drug ingested.
Chlorpromazine also causes prolongation of the QT and PR intervals,
blunting of the T waves, and depression of the ST segment. These drugs are
thus indicated only when other agents have been ineffective.
Sudden Death. Occasional reports of sudden cardiac death during
treatment with DRAs may be the result of cardiac arrhythmias. Other causes
may include seizure, asphyxiation, malignant hyperthermia, heatstroke, and
neuroleptic malignant syndrome. However, there does seem to be an overall
increased incidence of sudden death with antipsychotics.
Orthostatic (Postural) Hypotension. Orthostatic (postural) hypotension
is most frequent with low-potency drugs, particularly chlorpromazine,
thioridazine, and chlorprothixene. When using intramuscular (IM) lowpotency DRAs, the clinician should measure the patient’s BP (lying and
standing) before and after the first dose and during the first few days of
treatment.
Orthostatic hypotension is mediated by adrenergic blockade and occurs
most frequently during the first few days of treatment. Tolerance often
develops for this side effect, which is why the initial dosing of these drugs is
lower than the usual therapeutic dose. Fainting or falls, although uncommon,




<<<PAGE 1982>>>

OCD as a genetically determined, lifelong condition that is best treated
continuously with drugs and cognitive-behavioral therapy from the onset of
symptoms in childhood throughout the lifespan.
SSRI dosages for OCD may need to be higher than those required to treat
depression. Although some responses can be seen in the first few weeks of
treatment, it may take several months for the maximum effects to become
evident. Patients who fail to obtain adequate relief of their OCD symptoms
with an SSRI will usually benefit from the addition of a small dose of
risperidone (Risperdal). Apart from the extrapyramidal side effects of
risperidone, patients should be monitored for increases in prolactin levels
when this combination is used. Clinically, hyperprolactinemia may manifest
as gynecomastia and galactorrhea (in both men and women) and loss of
menses.
Several disorders are now considered to be within the OCD spectrum. This
spectrum includes several conditions and symptoms characterized by
nonsuicidal self-mutilation, such as trichotillomania, eyebrow picking, nose
picking, nail-biting, compulsive picking of skin blemishes, and cutting.
Patients with these behaviors benefit from treatment with SSRIs. Other
spectrum disorders include compulsive gambling, compulsive shopping,
hypochondriasis, and body dysmorphic disorder.
PANIC DISORDER. Paroxetine, fluoxetine, and sertraline are indicated for the

treatment of panic disorder, with or without agoraphobia. These agents work
less rapidly than do benzodiazepines but are far superior to them for the
treatment of panic disorder with comorbid depression. Citalopram and
fluvoxamine also may reduce spontaneous or induced panic attacks. Because
fluoxetine can initially heighten anxiety symptoms, persons with panic
disorder must begin taking small dosages (5 mg a day) and increase the
dosage slowly. Low doses of benzodiazepines may be given to manage this
side effect.
SOCIAL ANXIETY DISORDER. SSRIs are effective agents in the treatment of

social phobia. They reduce both symptoms and disability. The response rate
is comparable to that seen with the MAOI phenelzine (Nardil), the previous
standard treatment. The SSRIs are safer to use than MAOIs or
benzodiazepines.




<<<PAGE 2000>>>

venlafaxine may be beneficial in the treatment of obsessive-compulsive
disorder, panic disorder, agoraphobia, social phobia, ADHD, and patients
with a dual diagnosis of depression and cocaine dependence. It has also been
used in chronic pain syndromes with good effect.
Precautions and Adverse Reactions. Venlafaxine has a safety and
tolerability profile similar to that of the more widely prescribed SSRI class.
Nausea is the most frequently reported treatment-emergent adverse effect
associated with venlafaxine and DVS therapy. Initiating therapy at lower
dosages may also attenuate nausea. When extremely problematic, treatmentinduced nausea can be controlled by prescribing a selective 5-HT3 antagonist
or mirtazapine (Remeron).
Venlafaxine and DVS therapy is associated with sexual side effects,
predominantly decreased libido and a delay to orgasm or ejaculation. The
incidence of these side effects may exceed 30 to 40 percent when there is a
direct, detailed assessment of sexual function.
Other common side effects include headache, insomnia, somnolence, dry
mouth, dizziness, constipation, asthenia, sweating, and nervousness.
Although several side effects are suggestive of anticholinergic effects, these
drugs have no affinity for muscarinic or nicotinic receptors. Thus,
noradrenergic agonism is likely to be the culprit.
Higher-dose venlafaxine therapy is associated with an increased risk of
sustained elevations of BP. Experience with the instant-release (IR)
formulation in studies of depressed patients indicated that sustained
hypertension was dose-related, increasing from 3 to 7 percent at doses of 100
to 300 mg/day and 13 percent at doses greater than 300 mg/day. In this
dataset, venlafaxine therapy did not adversely affect BP control of patients
taking antihypertensives and lowered the mean values of patients with
elevated BP readings before therapy. In controlled studies of the extendedrelease formulation, venlafaxine therapy resulted in only approximately 1
percent greater risk of high BP when compared with the placebo. Arbitrarily
capping the upper dose of venlafaxine used in these studies, thus,
significantly attenuated concerns about elevated BP. When higher doses of
the extended-release formulation are used, however, monitoring of BP is
recommended.
Venlafaxine and DVS are commonly associated with discontinuation




<<<PAGE 2024>>>

weight gain, and sleep disturbances than the SSRIs. The half-lives and
plasma clearance for most TCAs are very similar.
Therapeutic Indications
The indications are similar to those for the SSRIs, which have widely
replaced the TCAs. However, the TCAs represent a reasonable alternative for
persons who cannot tolerate the adverse effects of the SSRIs.
Major Depressive Disorder. The treatment of a major depressive episode
and the prophylactic treatment of MDD are the principal indications for using
TCAs. Although the TCAs are effective in the treatment of depression in
persons with bipolar I disorder, they are more likely to induce mania,
hypomania, or cycling than the newer antidepressants, most notably the
SSRIs and bupropion. It is thus not advised that TCAs be routinely used to
treat depression associated with bipolar I or bipolar II disorder.
Melancholic features, prior major depressive episodes, and a family history
of depressive disorders increase the likelihood of therapeutic response. All of
the available TCAs are equally effective in the treatment of depressive
disorders. In the case of a person, however, one tricyclic or tetracyclic may be
useful, and another one may be ineffective. The treatment of a major
depressive episode with psychotic features almost always requires the
coadministration of an antipsychotic drug and an antidepressant.
Although it is used worldwide as an antidepressant, clomipramine is only
approved in the United States for the treatment of OCD.
Panic Disorder with Agoraphobia. Imipramine is the TCA most studied
for panic disorder with agoraphobia, but other TCAs are also useful when
taken at the usual antidepressant dosages. Because of the potential initial
anxiogenic effects of the TCAs, starting dosages should be small, and the
dosage should be titrated upward slowly. Small doses of benzodiazepines
may be used initially to deal with this side effect.
Generalized Anxiety Disorder. The FDA approves the use of doxepin for
the treatment of anxiety disorders. Some research data show that imipramine
may also be useful. Although rarely used anymore, a chlordiazepoxide–
amitriptyline combination (Limbitrol) is available for mixed anxiety and




<<<PAGE 2190>>>

Therapeutic Indications
There is considerably more experience in clinical psychiatry with clonidine
than with guanfacine. There is recent interest in the use of guanfacine for the
same indications that respond to clonidine due to guanfacine’s longer halflife and relative lack of sedative effects.
Withdrawal from Opioids, Alcohol, Benzodiazepines, or Nicotine.
Clonidine and guanfacine are effective in reducing the autonomic symptoms
of rapid opioid withdrawal (e.g., hypertension, tachycardia, dilated pupils,
sweating, lacrimation, and rhinorrhea) but not the associated subjective
sensations. Clonidine administration (0.1 to 0.2 mg two to four times a day)
is initiated before detoxification and is then tapered off over 1 to 2 weeks
(Table 21-55).
Clonidine and guanfacine can reduce symptoms of alcohol and
benzodiazepine withdrawal, including anxiety, diarrhea, and tachycardia.
They can reduce craving, anxiety, and irritability symptoms of nicotine
withdrawal. The transdermal patch formulation of clonidine is associated
with better long-term compliance for purposes of detoxification than is the
tablet formulation.
Tourette Disorder. Clonidine and guanfacine are effective drugs for the
treatment of Tourette disorder. Most clinicians begin treatment for Tourette
disorder with the standard DRAs haloperidol (Haldol) and pimozide (Orap)
and the SDAs risperidone (Risperdal) and olanzapine (Zyprexa). However, if
concerned about the adverse effects of these drugs, the clinician may begin
treatment with clonidine or guanfacine. The starting dose of clonidine for
children is 0.05 mg a day; it can be increased to 0.3 mg a day in divided
doses. Clonidine may take long periods (e.g., 4 to 6 months) to positively
effect the symptoms of the disorder. The response rate has been reported to
be up to 70 percent.
Table 21-54
α2-Adrenergic Receptor Agonists Used in Psychiatrya




<<<PAGE 2565>>>

behavior
secondary to fear
and anxiety;
suicidal behavior

reinforcement of
social support

Adolescent crises

Suicidal attempts
Evaluation of suicidal
and ideation;
potential, extent of
substance abuse,
substance abuse,
truancy, trouble
family dynamics;
with law,
crisis-oriented family
pregnancy,
and individual
running away;
therapy;
eating disorders;
hospitalization if
psychosis
necessary;
consultation with
appropriate
extrafamilial
authorities

Agoraphobia

Panic; depression

Alprazolam, 0.25–2 mg;
antidepressant
medication

Agranulocytosis
(clozapine induced)

High fever,
pharyngitis, oral
and perianal
ulcerations

Discontinue medication
immediately;
administer
granulocyte colonystimulating factor

Akathisia

Agitation,
restlessness,
muscle
discomfort;
dysphoria

Reduce antipsychotic
dosage; propranolol
(30–120 mg a day);
benzodiazepines;
diphenhydramine
orally or IV;
benztropine IM

Alcohol-Related Emergencies




<<<PAGE 3593>>>

apperceptive visual, 927
associative visual, 927
auditory sound, 927
color, 926
tactile, 925
Agoraphobia, 403
Agrammatism, 48
Agranulocytosis, 593
AIDS mania, 259
Ainsworth, Mary, 167, 892
on insecure attachment, 1011–1012
Akathisia, 703
medication-induced, 597
Akinetic mutism, 254
Alanine aminotransferase (ALT), 697
Alarm therapy
for enuresis, 484
Alcohol, 275
absorption, 285–286
abuse, 275
neurologic and medical complications, 279t
and seizures, 276
behavioral effects, 286
beverage alcohol, 285
brain, effects on, 286
drug interactions, 286–287
effects of, 285
GABA receptor regulation by, 963, 964
and gastrointestinal system, 286
and insomnia, 491, 491t
intoxication, 276
and blackouts, 277–278
idiosyncratic, 284–285
levels of impairment at various concentrations, 276t
liver, effects on, 286
metabolism, 286
in pregnancy, 279




<<<PAGE 3716>>>

psychological factors, 22
timing of, 22
Physical health, monitoring of, 60
Physician-assisted suicide, 864–865, 865t
AMA’s approach to requests of, 865t
Oregon’s assisted suicide law, 864, 865t
Physician Charter on Professionalism, 832, 833t
Physician marriages, 589
Physicians
impaired, 832
in training, 832
Physostigmine salicylate, 228
Phytomedicines
adverse effects, 713
psychoactive properties, 714–719
Piaget, Jean, 890, 890t, 901, 1007–1011
on cognitive development, 1007
intellectual development stages by, 1008t
life of, 1007
sensorimotor period of cognitive development, 1008t
Pica, 162–164
course and prognosis, 163
diagnosis and clinical features, 163
differential diagnosis, 163
epidemiology, 164
etiology, 163
pathology and laboratory examination, 163
in pregnancy, 163
treatment, 163–164
Pick disease, 243, 243f
Pickwickian syndrome, 21
Pictorial Instrument for Children and Adolescents (PICA-III-R), 77, 78
Pimozide, 619
for Tourette disorder, 160
Pippard Postoperative Rating Scale, 742
Pitolisant, for narcolepsy, 513
Pituitary disorders, 261


