<<<PAGE 463>>>

442  The Maudsley® Prescribing Guidelines in Psychiatry

There has been limited formal study into the duration of withdrawal symptoms, with
some reports of weeks-long duration, but they can last longer than a year, especially in
the case of long-term use.20,23 For a minority, withdrawal symptoms can be protracted
and last years, sometimes called the ‘post-acute withdrawal syndrome’.26

Stopping benzodiazepines

CHAPTER 3

If the patient is in agreement, benzodiazepines should be withdrawn. Tapering can be
difficult and should not be imposed on a patient against their will. A cluster randomised
trial supports the effectiveness of a face-to-face educational intervention.27 Continuing
support can be required to prepare a patient for withdrawal and to support them
through the process (e.g. psychological therapies or self-help groups).28

Dosage reduction (tapering)
Gradual reduction of benzodiazepine dose reduces the intensity of withdrawal symptoms by spreading them out over a longer time period (and giving time for neural adaptations to the drug to resolve).22 Meta-analysis has confirmed that gradual dose
reduction (‘tapering’) improves drug cessation rates compared with routine clinical
care.29 Most studies find that a gradual withdrawal over at least 10 weeks is most successful in achieving long-term abstinence,30 although many patients will require considerably longer (sometimes several years). Sudden benzodiazepine withdrawal has
potentially fatal consequences, so tapering is always advisable.

Direct taper or switching to diazepam?
Patients who take short- or intermediate-acting benzodiazepines can be tapered off
these drugs directly but more than once a day dosing might be required.
An alternative approach is to switch to an equivalent dose of diazepam (which has a
long half-life and therefore might provokes less severe withdrawal),20,24 noting that
some patients report withdrawal symptoms from abrupt switches to diazepam and so
a step-wise switch is probably prudent. Cochrane is lukewarm about switching to diazepam.30 Approximate ‘diazepam equivalent’31 doses are shown Table 3.29. Owing to
Table 3.29 Approximate ‘diazepam equivalent’31 doses
Chlordiazepoxide

25mg

Clonazepam

0.5mg

Diazepam

10mg

Lorazepam

1mg

Lormetazepam

1–2mg

Nitrazepam

10mg

Oxazepam

20mg

Temazepam

20mg




<<<PAGE 653>>>

Dexamfetamine
(dexamphetamine) – 0

Aripiprazole – 1

Ipratropium bromide – 0

Insulin – 0

Indapamide – 0

Imipramine – 3

Peppermint oil – 0

Penicillin – 0

Paroxetine – 2

Paracetamol – 0

Pantoprazole – 0

Dexamethasone – NK

Amlodipine – 0

Oxybutynin – 3

Apomorphine – 0

Cyclizine – 1

Amitriptyline – 3

Hyoscine hydrobromide – 3

Oxcarbazepine – NK

Desipramine – 2

Co-tenidone – 0

Amisulpride – 0

Hydroxyzine – 1

Orphenadrine – 3

Apixaban – NK

Colchicine – NK

Amiodarone – 1

Hydrocortisone – NK

Orlistat – 0

Darifenacin – 0

Codeine – NK

Aminophylline – 0

Hydrocodone – NK

Ondansetron – 0

Anastrozole – NK

Co-careldopa – 0

Amiloride – 0

Hydrochlorothiazide – 0

Omeprazole – 0

Iloperidone – 1

Co-beneldopa – 0

Amantadine – 2

Heparin – 0

Dabigatran – NK

Clozapine – 3

Alverine – 0

Olanzapine – 2

Haloperidol – 0

Amoxicillin – 0

Clopidogrel – 0

Alprazolam – 0

Nortriptyline – 3

Granisetron – 0

Nitrofurantoin – NK

Paliperidone – 1

Clonidine – NK

Allopurinol – NK

Gliclazide – 0

Nimodipine – 0

Ibuprofen – 0

Clonazepam – NK

Alimemazine (trimeprazine) – 3

Gaviscon – 0

Nifedipine – 0

Cyproheptadine – 3

Clomipramine – 3

Alfuzosin – 0

Galantamine – 0

Naproxen – 0

Oxycodone – NK

Clemastine – 3

Alendronic acid
(Alendronate) – 0

Gabapentin – 0

Hysoscine butylbromide
(buscopan) – 1

Clarithromycin – NK

Adcal – 0

Table 6.4 Anticholinergic effect on cognition (AEC) scores4 (updated October 2020)

Trazodone – 0

Tramadol – 0

Topiramate – NK

Tolterodine – 2

Tolcapone – 0

Tizanidine – NK

Tiotropium bromide
(inhalation) – 0

Thiamine – 0

Theophylline – 0

Tetracycline – 0

Temazepam – 1

Tamsulosin – 0

Tamoxifen – NK

Sulpiride – 0

Sulphasalazine – 0

Spironolactone – NK

Sotalol – 0

Solifenacin – 1

Sitagliptin – 0




<<<PAGE 750>>>

Hepatic and renal impairment  729

Table 8.3 (Continued)
Drug

Comments

Valproate

74

Highly protein bound and hepatically metabolised. Dosage reduction with close
monitoring of LFTs in moderate hepatic impairment. Use plasma levels (measure free
levels − total concentrations may appear to be normal) to guide dosage. Caution
advised. Contraindicated in severe and/or active hepatic impairment, or family history
of severe impairment; impairment of usual metabolic pathway can lead to generation
of hepatotoxic metabolites via alternative pathway. Risk of liver toxicity is increased in
people with hepatic insufficiency if salicylates are used concomitantly. Associated
with elevated LFTs and serious hepatotoxicity including fulminant hepatic failure
(sometimes fatal). Mitochondrial disease, learning disability, polypharmacy, metabolic
disorders and underlying hepatic disease may be risk factors. Particularly hepatotoxic
in very young children. The greatest risk is in the first three months of treatment.

Stimulants in hepatic impairment5,6,75
Recommendations for the use of stimulant medications in hepatic impairment are outlined in Table 8.4.
Table 8.4 Stimulants in hepatic impairment
Atomoxetine76

Reduce initial and target dose by 50% in moderate impairment, and by 75% in
severe impairment. Very rare reports of liver toxicity, manifested by elevated hepatic
enzymes, and raised bilirubin with jaundice. SPC states ‘discontinue in patients with
jaundice or laboratory evidence of liver injury, and do not restart’.

Methylphenidate77

Rare reports of liver dysfunction and hypersensitivity reactions.

Dexamphetamine/
lisdexamphetamine78,79

Little experience in liver disease, manufacturers recommend cautious dose titration.
Very rarely associated with abnormal liver function, two case reports of
hepatotoxicity.80,81

Sedatives in hepatic impairment
Table 8.5 summarises recommended sedatives in hepatic impairment.

Benzodiazepines

Extensively hepatically metabolised. Prolonged duration of effect particularly for drugs
with active metabolites (diazepam, midazolam, clonazepam). Lorazepam, oxazepam and
temazepam do not have active metabolites and are preferred; lorazepam is considered
the best tolerated in advanced liver disease19 and is commonly used in alcohol
withdrawal. Serum enzyme elevations are uncommon and liver injury very rare.19

Promethazine6

Extensive hepatic metabolism. Manufacturers recommend caution in liver
impairment. Jaundice reported with high doses, no reports of LFT abnormalities or
toxicity with lower doses.19

Z drugs6,82,83

Hepatically metabolised, but all have a relatively short half-life (1–7 hours). Reduce
initial doses in mild to moderate impairment (use zopiclone 3.75mg, zolpidem 5mg,
zaleplon 5mg), avoid in severe impairment. Zaleplon is subject to significant first-pass
metabolism and zolpidem plasma concentrations and half-life are significantly
increased in hepatic impairment; these agents should be used with caution.84 Although
zopiclone has the longer half-life, this may not be clinically relevant except in severe
disease.83 Zopiclone and zaleplon have not been associated with hepatotoxicity. There
are rare reports of abnormal LFTs and a single case of liver injury with zolpidem.19
(Continued)

CHAPTER 8

Table 8.5 Sedatives in hepatic impairment




<<<PAGE 751>>>

730  The Maudsley® Prescribing Guidelines in Psychiatry

Table 8.5 (Continued)
Melatonin6,85

Complex handling of melatonin in liver impairment: reduced clearance and
prolonged half-life contribute to higher circulating levels of endogenous melatonin in
daytime hours; negative feedback and accumulation of toxic products results in
reduced endogenous production. Relevance to dosing of exogenous melatonin is
unclear, although toxicity of melatonin is minimal. Manufacturer recommends
avoiding in liver disease. Rarely associated with changes in LFTs.

Other psychotropics in hepatic impairment
Table 8.6 gives a summary of other psychotropics recommended in hepatic impairment.
Table 8.6 Other psychotropics in hepatic impairment
Bremelanotide6

No dose adjustment required in mild to moderate hepatic impairment. Use with caution
in severe impairment; adverse effects more likely.27 One case of acute hepatitis reported.

Deutetrabenazine5,19

Not studied in hepatic impairment, but based on experience with tetrabenazine, use
is contraindicated. Limited information available but clinically relevant hepatotoxicity
not reported. Occasional asymptomatic rises in ALT.

Lemborexant6,27

No dose adjustment in mild impairment (risk of increased somnolence), starting and
maximum dose of 5mg once nightly in moderate impairment, not recommended in
severe impairment. Little experience but hepatotoxicity not reported.86

Pitolisant5,27

Extensively hepatically metabolised. No dose adjustment in mild impairment. In
moderate impairment the half-life is doubled; daily dose can be increased two weeks
after initiation, daily maximum 18mg. Contraindicated in severe impairment. Hepatic
enzyme increases are uncommon.

Solriamfetol5

Not metabolised. No known problems in liver impairment, no reports of liver injury.

Valbenazine6,19

Hepatically metabolised pro-drug of alpha-dihydrotetrabenazine. Unlike
deutetrabenazine, not contra-indicated in liver disease, but maximum dose of 40mg
in moderate to severe impairment. Few data, but no reports of clinically relevant liver
injury other than a single report of reactivation of pre-existing hepatitis C.

Psychotropics in hepatic impairment
Table 8.7 gives an outline of recommended psychotropics in hepatic impairment.

CHAPTER 8

Table 8.7 Psychotropics in hepatic impairment
Drug group

Recommended drugs

Antipsychotics

Sulpiride/amisulpride: no dosage reduction required if renal function is normal
Paliperidone: if depot required

Antidepressants

Paroxetine, sertraline, citalopram, or vortioxetine: start at low dose. Titrate
slowly (if required) as above.

Mood-stabilisers

Lithium: use plasma levels to guide dosage. Care needed if ascites status changes.

Sedatives

Lorazepam, oxazepam, temazepam: as short half-life with no active metabolites
Use low doses with caution, as sedative drugs used in severe disease can precipitate
hepatic encephalopathy
Zopiclone: 3.75mg with care in moderate hepatic impairment




<<<PAGE 768>>>

Hepatic and renal impairment  747

Table 8.11 (Continued)
Drug

Comments

Promethazine22,23,25,32,180

Dose reduction usually not necessary; however, promethazine has a long half-life so
monitor for excessive sedative effects in patients with renal impairment.
Manufacturer advises caution in renal impairment. There is a case report of interstitial
nephritis in a patient who was a poor metaboliser of promethazine.

Temazepam22,23,25,32

<2% excreted unchanged in urine. In renal impairment the inactive metabolite can
accumulate. Monitor for excessive sedative effects. Dosing: GFR 20–50mL/min, dose
as normal renal function; GFR <20mL/min, dose as in normal renal function but start
with 5mg.

Zolpidem22,23,25,154,181

Clearance moderately reduced in renal impairment. No dose adjustment required in
renal impairment. Zolpidem 1mg has been used to treat insomnia in patients on
haemodialysis. Ongoing RCT of zolpidem to aid sleep in haemodialysis patients with
pruritis.182 Associated with acute pyelonephritis in women.183

Zopiclone22,23,25,184,185

Less than 5% excreted unchanged in urine. Manufacturer states no accumulation of
zopiclone in renal impairment but suggests starting at 3.75mg. Dosing: GFR <10mL/
min, start with lower dose. Interstitial nephritis reported rarely.

Drug

Comments

Donepezil23,25,186–188

17% excreted unchanged in urine. Dosing is as in normal renal function for GFR
<10–50mL/min. Manufacturer states that clearance not affected by renal impairment.
Single dose studies find similar pharmacokinetics in moderate and severe renal
impairment compared with healthy controls. Has been used at a dose of 3mg/day in
an elderly patient with Alzheimer’s dementia on dialysis. Single case of
rhabdomyolysis causing acute renal failure.189

Galantamine23,25

18–22% is excreted unchanged in urine. Dose as in normal renal function for GFR
10–50mL/min and at GFR <10mL/min start at a low dose and increase slowly.
Manufacturer contraindicates use in GFR <10mL/min. Plasma levels may be increased
in patients with moderate and severe renal impairment.

Memantine22,23,190

Manufacturers recommend a 10mg dose if GFR 5–29mL/min; 10mg daily for 7 days
then increased to 20mg daily if tolerated for GFR >30–49mL/min. Renal tubular
acidosis, severe urinary tract infections and alkalisation of urine (e.g. by drastic
dietary changes) can increase plasma levels of memantine. Acute renal failure has
been reported with memantine.

Rivastigmine23,25

0% excreted unchanged in urine. Dosing advice for GFR <50mL/min start at a low
dose and gradually increase. Steady state plasma concentrations are not affected by
renal function.191

CHAPTER 8

Table 8.12 Anti-dementia drugs in renal impairment




<<<PAGE 801>>>

CHAPTER 10

780  The Maudsley® Prescribing Guidelines in Psychiatry

antipsychotics, quetiapine, olanzapine and aripiprazole (as there is lower risk of EPSEs).
A case report describes successful treatment of ‘HIV mania’ with ziprasidone.30

Anxiety disorders
Anxiety disorders are highly prevalent in PLWH. Generalised anxiety, panic disorders
and PTSD are commonly reported. SSRIs are first-line options for anxiety and panic
disorders treatment in standard guidelines, as well as in PLWH3 (see ‘Depression’ in this
section for preferred options). Benzodiazepines may have some utility in the acute treatment of anxiety but require caution because of the potential of misuse, possible drug
interactions and increased risk of neurocognitive impairment in PLWH.31
Lorazepam, oxazepam and temazepam are metabolised by non-CYP450 pathways,
hence have lower risk of interactions and may be preferred options for PLWH.32
Buspirone may also be useful.33

HIV-associated neurocognitive disorders
In the current era of effective antiretrovirals, the incidence of severe HIV-associated
cerebral disease has declined dramatically; however, more subtle forms of HIVassociated neurocognitive disorders (HAND) remain prevalent.34,35 Risk factors include
comorbidities (e.g. HCV coinfection), HIV infection itself and patient genetic factors.
HAND encompasses three sub-disorders, ranging from more common, asymptomatic
neurocognitive impairment (ANI), to more severe less common, HIV-associated dementia (HAD) disorders. Screening for cognitive impairment is recommended in PLWH.11
CogState or the HIV dementia scale have been used though may not identify ANI.35
Symptoms include apathy, irritability, inertia, lack of spontaneity, social withdrawal,
psychomotor slowing, complaints of diminished attention and concentration, emotional lability, and occasionally, ‘HIV mania’.29
The main treatment is antiretroviral therapy with high CNS penetration effectiveness
(CPE) aiming at reaching good levels in the CNS with minimal drug-related neurotoxicity.
Further adjunctive treatments have been studied (minocycline, memantine, selegiline, lithium, valproate, lexipafant, nimodipine, psychostimulants, natalizumab interferons, etc.).36
In a recent study paroxetine was associated with neurocognitive improvements (after
adjusting for depression),37 while a trial of rivastigmine patch was negative. Further
studies are needed to confirm the effects of these adjunctive treatments for HAND.

Interactions between antiretroviral drugs and psychotropics
Pharmacokinetic interactions between antiretroviral drugs and psychotropics occur frequently and can be clinically significant. Potential interactions should be checked for all
patients receiving antiretrovirals and psychotropics concomitantly. Drug history for
checking drug interactions should include current prescribed medication, alternative/
herbal treatments, recreational drugs and other non-prescribed medicines.34
Readers are directed to regularly updated online resources for information about individual pharmacokinetic interactions:
■■
■■

www.hiv-druginteractions.org (also available as an App)
www.hivinsite.ucsf.edu




<<<PAGE 906>>>

Psychotropic drugs in special conditions  885

Table 13.3 Benzodiazepines concentration in normal dosing and the legal limit

Clonazepam 0.5–6.0mg41,42

5–80µg/L (50)

Diazepam 5–30mg

50–1000µg/L (550)

43

Flunitrazepam 0.5–2.0mg

10–20µg/L (300)

Lorazepam 1–4mg46,47

10–70µg/L (100)

44,45

Oxazepam 15–30mg48

250–600µg/L (300)

Temazepam 10–20mg

200–900µg/L (1000)

49

In regards to methadone, doses of up to 80mg a day generally give plasma levels
below the UK legal limit.50 The legal limits listed here apply only to those who are lawfully prescribed the drug in question – the driver may be subject to prosecution if it can
be proved the drugs were taken illicitly.

Other medicines
Many psychotropics can impair alertness, concentration and driving performance.
Medicines that block H1, α1-adrenergic or cholinergic receptors may be particularly
problematic. Effects are particularly marked at the start of treatment and after
increasing the dose. Drivers must be made aware of any potential for impairment
and are advised to evaluate their driving performance at these times. They must stop
driving if adversely affected.51 The use of alcohol will further increase any
impairment.
Some antipsychotics and antidepressants lower the seizure threshold. In the UK,
the DVLA advises this is taken into consideration when prescribing for a driver.
Further information about the effects of psychotropics on driving can be found in
Table 13.2.
Medication-induced sedation
Many psychotropics are sedating. The more sedating a medicine is, the more likely it is
to impair driving ability. Other medicines, either prescribed or bought over the counter,
may also be sedative and/or affect driving ability (e.g. antihistamines5). One study
found that 89% of patients taking other psychotropics in addition to antidepressants
failed a battery of ‘fitness to drive’ tests.52 Since the degree of sedation any individual
will experience is very difficult to predict, patients prescribed sedating medicines should
be advised not to drive if they feel sedated. In the UK, it is the responsibility of the
driver to ensure they are fit to drive.

CHAPTER 13

Range of concentrations reported
(legal limit)

Drug/daily dose


