<<<PAGE 140>>>

Table 1.16 Other options for the treatment of TD
Drug

Comments
Use is supported by a small randomised, placebo-controlled trial. Low risk of toxicity

Amino acids

74

Botulinum toxin

Case reports of success for localised dyskinesia. Probably now treatment of choice for
disabling or distressing focal symptoms

Calcium antagonists79

A few published studies but not widely used. Cochrane is dismissive.80 A metaanalysis found no effect49

Donepezil81–83

Supported by a single open study and case series. One negative RCT (n = 12). Dose
is 10mg/day. No clear evidence of efficacy for rivastigmine or galantamine84

Fish oils85,86

Very limited support for the use of EPA at dose of 2g/day

75–78

Fluvoxamine87

Three case reports. Dose is 100mg/day. Beware of interactions

Gabapentin

Adds weight to theory that GABAergic mechanisms improve TD.
Dose is 900–1200mg/day. Inconclusive data on other GABA agonists89

Levetiracetam90–93

Three published case studies. One RCT. Dose up to 3000mg/day

Melatonin

Use is supported by a meta-analysis of four trials.95 Usually well tolerated. Dose is
10mg/day. Some evidence that melatonin receptor genotype determines risk of TD96

Naltrexone97

May be effective when added to benzodiazepines. Well tolerated.
Dose is 200mg/day

Ondansetron98,99

Limited evidence but low toxicity.
Dose – up to 12mg/day

Propranolol100–102

Formerly a relatively widely used treatment. Open-label studies only and a
prospective randomized trial is probably warranted. Dose is 40–120mg/day. Beware
of contra-indications (asthma, bradycardia, hypotension)

Quercetin103

Plant compound which is thought to be an antioxidant.
Some promising case reports103–105

Sodium oxybate106

One case report. Dose was 8g/day

Repetitive transcranial
magnetic stimulation
(rTMS)107,108

RCT data on patients with ‘tardive syndromes’ suggest the potential for bilateral
hemispheric high frequency rTMS to be a feasible treatment where TD is
unresponsive to ‘first-line’ medical treatment107

Zolpidem109

Three case reports. Dose 10–30mg a day

88

94

CHAPTER 1

Schizophrenia and related psychoses  119




<<<PAGE 484>>>

Addictions and substance misuse  463

Relapse prevention
There is no place for the continued use of benzodiazepines beyond treatment of the
acute alcohol withdrawal syndrome. Acamprosate and supervised disulfiram are
licensed for treatment of alcohol dependence in the UK and may be offered in combination with psychosocial treatment.2 Treatment should be initiated by a specialist service.
After 12 weeks, transfer of the prescribing to the GP may be appropriate, although
specialist care may continue (shared care). Naltrexone is also recommended as an
adjunct in the treatment of moderate and severe alcohol dependence.2 As it does not
have marketing authorisation for the treatment of alcohol dependence in the UK,
informed consent should be sought and documented prior to commencing treatment.

Acamprosate is a synthetic taurine analogue that acts as a functional glutamatergic
N-methyl-d-aspartate antagonist and also increases γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA)-ergic
function. The number needed to treat (NNT) for the maintenance of abstinence has
been calculated as 9–11.9 The treatment effect is most pronounced at 6 months with the
risk ratio (compared with placebo) of returning to drinking behaviour dropping to
0.83, though the effect has been shown to be significant for up to 12 months.2,20,21
Acamprosate should be initiated as soon as possible after abstinence has been achieved
(the BAP consensus guidelines9 recommend that acamprosate should be started ‘during
detoxification’ because of its potential neuroprotective effect). NICE2 recommends that
acamprosate should be continued for up to 6 months with regular (monthly) supervision. The SPC recommends that it is given for 1 year.
Acamprosate is relatively well tolerated; side effects include diarrhoea, abdominal
pain, nausea, vomiting and pruritis.2 It is contraindicated in severe renal or hepatic
impairment, thus baseline liver and kidney function tests should be performed before
commencing treatment. Acamprosate should be avoided in individuals who are pregnant or breastfeeding.
Acamprosate: NICE Clinical Guideline 115, 20112,20
Acamprosate should be offered for relapse prevention in moderately to severely dependent
drinkers, in combination with psychosocial treatment. It should be prescribed for up to 6 months,
or longer for those who perceive benefit and wish to continue taking it. The dose is 1998mg daily
(666mg three times per day) for individuals over 60kg. For those under 60kg, the dose is 1332mg
daily. Treatment should be stopped in those who continue to drink for 4–6 weeks after starting
the drug.

Naltrexone
Opioid blockade prevents increased dopaminergic activity after the consumption of
alcohol, thus reducing its rewarding effects. Naltrexone, a non-selective opioid receptor
antagonist, significantly reduces relapse to heavy drinking.2,22 Although early trials used
a dose of 50mg/day, more recent US studies have used 100mg/day. In the UK, the usual
dose is 50mg/day with a trial dose of 25mg for 2 days to check for side effects.

CHAPTER 4

Acamprosate




<<<PAGE 485>>>

464  The Maudsley® Prescribing Guidelines in Psychiatry

Naltrexone is well tolerated but side effects include nausea (especially in the early
stages of treatment), headache, abdominal pain, reduced appetite and tiredness. A
comprehensive medical assessment should be carried out prior to commencing naltrexone, together with baseline renal function tests and LFTs. Naltrexone can be
started when patients are still drinking or during medically assisted withdrawal.
There is no clear evidence as to the optimal duration of treatment but 6 months
appears to be an appropriate period with follow up, including monitoring liver
function.9
Patients on naltrexone should not be given opioid agonist drugs for analgesia: nonopioid analgesics should be used instead. In the event that opioid analgesia is necessary,
it can be instituted 48–72 hours after cessation of naltrexone. Hepatotoxicity has been
described with high doses of naltrexone, so use should be avoided in acute liver
failure.23

CHAPTER 4

Naltrexone: NICE Clinical Guideline 115, 20112,22
Naltrexone [50mg/day] should be offered for relapse prevention in moderately to severely
dependent drinkers, in combination with psychosocial treatment. It should be prescribed for up to
6 months, or longer for those who perceive benefit and wish to continue taking it. Treatment
should be stopped in those who continue to drink for 4–6 weeks after starting the drug or in
those who feel unwell while taking it.

Long-acting injectable naltrexone has been developed to improve compliance. Side
effects are similar to those seen with the oral preparation.24 NICE concluded that the
initial evidence was encouraging but not enough to support routine use.
Nalmefene
Nalmefene is also an opioid antagonist, recommended by NICE as an option for reducing alcohol consumption, for people with alcohol dependence.2,22 It has been shown in
one indirect meta-analysis to be superior to naltrexone in reducing heavy drinking.25
However, use of nalmefene remains controversial, with another meta-analysis suggested that nalmefene had only limited efficacy in reducing alcohol consumption and
that its value in treating alcohol addiction and relapse prevention is not fully
established.26
Disulfiram (antabuse)
Disulfiram inhibits the enzyme aldehyde dehydrogenase, thus preventing complete
metabolism of alcohol in the liver. This results in an accumulation of the toxic intermediate product acetaldehyde, which causes the alcohol–disulfiram reaction.




<<<PAGE 486>>>

Addictions and substance misuse  465

Mild alcohol–disulfiram reaction
Facial flushing
■■ Sweating
■■ Nausea
■■ Hyperventilation
■■ Dyspnea
■■ Tachycardia
■■ Hypotension
■■

Contraindications
Ingestion of alcohol within the previous 24 hours
■■ Cardiac failure
■■ Coronary artery disease
■■ Hypertension
■■ Cerebrovascular disease
■■ Pregnancy
■■ Breastfeeding
■■ Liver disease
■■ Peripheral neuropathy
■■ Severe mental illness
Severe alcohol–disulfiram reaction
Acute heart failure
■■ Myocardial infarction
■■ Arrhythmias
■■ Bradycardia
■■ Respiratory depression
■■ Severe hypotension
■■

The therapeutic effect of disulfiram is thus mediated by its incompatibility with alcohol, resulting in alcohol aversion. Supervised medication optimises compliance and
contributes to effectiveness.
The intensity of the intolerance reaction is dose dependent, both with regard to the
amount of alcohol consumed and the dose of disulfiram. However, it is thought that
much of the therapeutic effect is mediated by the mental anticipation of the aversive
reaction, rather than the pharmacological action itself. Sudden death is more prevalent
at doses above 1000mg.27 With this in mind, the value of prescribing higher doses of
disulfiram must be carefully considered.
Doses are 800mg for the first dose, reducing to 100–200mg daily for maintenance. In
co-morbid alcohol and cocaine dependence, doses of 500mg daily have been given.
Halitosis is a common side effect. If there is a sudden onset of jaundice (the rare complication of hepatotoxicity), the patient should stop the drug and seek urgent medical
attention.
The evidence for disulfiram is weaker than for acamprosate and naltrexone.2 In the
UK, NICE recommends its use ‘as a second-line option for moderate-to-severe alcohol
dependence for patients who are not suitable for acamprosate or naltrexone or have a
specified preference for disulfiram and who aim to stay abstinent from alcohol’.2

CHAPTER 4

■■




<<<PAGE 488>>>

Addictions and substance misuse  467

The number of young people who are dependent and needing pharmacotherapy is
likely to be small, but for those who are dependent there should be a lower threshold
for admission to hospital. Doses of chlordiazepoxide for medically assisted withdrawal
may need to be adjusted, but the general principles of withdrawal management are the
same as for adults. All young people should have a full health screen carried out routinely to allow identification of physical and mental health problems. The evidence base
for acamprosate, naltrexone and disulfiram in 16–19-year-olds is evolving,9 but naltrexone is best supported in this age group.32,33

Older adults

Concurrent alcohol and drug use disorders
Where alcohol and drug use disorders are co-morbid, treat both conditions actively.2
Co-existing alcohol and benzodiazepine dependence
This is best managed with one benzodiazepine, either chlordiazepoxide or diazepam.
The starting dose should take into account the requirements for medically assisted alcohol withdrawal and the typical daily equivalent dose of the relevant benzodiazepine(s).2
Inpatient treatment should be carried out over a 2–3-week period, possibly longer.2
Co-existing alcohol dependence and cocaine use
In co-morbid cocaine/alcohol dependence, naltrexone 150mg/day resulted in reduced
cocaine and alcohol use in men but not in women.34
Co-existing alcohol and opioid dependence
Both conditions should be treated, and attention paid to the increased mortality of
individuals withdrawing from both drugs.
Co-morbid alcohol and nicotine dependence
Encourage individuals to stop smoking. Refer for smoking cessation in primary care
and other settings. In inpatient settings, offer nicotine patches/inhalator during assisted
alcohol withdrawal. Always promote vaping as a safer alternative to tobacco
smoking.

CHAPTER 4

There should be a lower threshold for inpatient medically assisted alcohol withdrawal
for older adults.2 While benzodiazepines remain the treatment of choice, they may need
to be prescribed in lower doses and in some situations shorter acting drugs may be
preferred.9 All older adults with alcohol-use disorders should have full routine health
screens to identify physical and mental health problems. The evidence base for pharmacotherapy of alcohol-use disorders in older people is limited.




<<<PAGE 489>>>

468  The Maudsley® Prescribing Guidelines in Psychiatry

Co-morbid mental health disorders
People with alcohol-use disorders often present with other mental health disorders,
particularly anxiety and depression. Public Health England has described it as ‘the
norm rather than the exception’ and encourage a collaborative, effective and flexible
approach between frontline services, stating that it is ‘everyone’s job’ and that there is
‘no wrong door’.35
Substance-use disorders including alcohol misuse should never be a reason to exclude a
patient from:
■■
■■

Crisis psychiatric services
Mood/anxiety/personality services after completion of detoxification.

CHAPTER 4

Depression
Depressive and anxiety symptoms occur commonly during alcohol withdrawal, but usually diminish by the third or fourth week of abstinence. Meta-analyses suggest that antidepressants with mixed pharmacology (the tricyclics imipramine or trimipramine)
perform better than selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs; fluoxetine or sertraline) in reducing depressive symptoms in individuals with an alcohol-use disorder, but the
antidepressant effect is modest.2,9,36,37 A greater antidepressant effect was seen if the diagnosis of depression was made after at least 1 week of abstinence, thus excluding those
with affective symptoms caused by alcohol withdrawal. There is stronger evidence for
depression categorised as independent, rather than substance induced.36 As treatment
effects are masked by comparatively large placebo effects, which conceal improvements
that would otherwise be attributed to medication, there is a need for larger randomised
placebo-controlled trials. Despite the evidence for tricyclics, they are not recommended
in clinical practice because of their potential for cardiotoxicity and toxicity in overdose.
Relapse prevention medication should be considered in combination with antidepressants. Pettinati et al.38 showed that the combination of sertraline (200mg/day) with
naltrexone (100mg/day) had superior outcomes – improved drinking outcomes and
better mood – compared with placebo and compared with each drug alone. In contrast,
citalopram showed no benefit when added to naltrexone.39
Secondary analyses of acamprosate and naltrexone trials suggest that:
acamprosate has an indirect modest beneficial effect on depression via increasing
abstinence and
■■ in depressed alcohol-dependent patients, the combination of naltrexone and an antidepressant may be better than either drug alone,9 but findings are not consistent.39
■■

Bipolar affective disorder
Bipolar patients tend to use alcohol to reduce symptoms of anxiety. Where there is comorbidity, it is important to treat the different phases as recommended in guidelines for
bipolar disorder. It may be worth adding sodium valproate to lithium as two trials have




<<<PAGE 490>>>

Addictions and substance misuse  469

shown that the combination was associated with better drinking outcomes than lithium
alone. However, the combination did not confer any extra benefit than lithium alone in
improving mood (see BAP consensus 2012).9 Note that, in those who continue to drink,
electrolyte imbalance may precipitate lithium toxicity. Lithium is best avoided completely in binge drinkers.
Naltrexone should be offered, in the first instance, to help bipolar patients reduce
their alcohol consumption.9 If naltrexone is not effective, then acamprosate should be
offered. In the event that both naltrexone and acamprosate fail to promote abstinence,
disulfiram should be considered, and the risks made known to the patient.

Anxiety is commonly observed in alcohol-dependent individuals during intoxication,
withdrawal and in the early days of abstinence. Alcohol is typically used to self-medicate anxiety disorders, particularly social anxiety. In alcohol-dependent individuals
who experience anxiety it is often difficult to determine the extent to which the anxiety
is a symptom of the alcohol-use disorder or whether it is an independent disorder.
Medically assisted withdrawal and supported abstinence for up to 8 weeks are required
before a full assessment can be made. If a medically assisted withdrawal is not possible,
then treatment of the anxiety disorder should still be attempted, following guidelines
for the respective anxiety disorder.
The use of benzodiazepines is controversial9 because of the increased risk of benzodiazepine misuse and dependence. Benzodiazepines should only be considered following assessment in a specialist addiction service.
One meta-analysis suggests that buspirone is effective in reducing symptoms of anxiety, but not alcohol consumption.9,40 Studies have also shown that paroxetine (up to
60mg/day) was superior to placebo in reducing social anxiety in co-morbid patients:
alcohol consumption was not affected.9,40
Either naltrexone or disulfiram, alone or combined, improved drinking outcomes
compared with placebo in patients with post-traumatic stress disorder and alcohol
dependence. Both acamprosate and baclofen have shown benefit in reducing anxiety in
post hoc analyses of alcohol dependence trials (see BAP consensus for references9). It is
therefore important to ensure that these patients are enabled to become abstinent and
are prescribed relapse prevention medication. Anxiety should then be treated according
to the appropriate NICE guidelines.
Schizophrenia
Patients with schizophrenia who also have an alcohol-use disorder should be assessed
and alcohol-specific relapse prevention treatment considered, either naltrexone or
acamprosate. Antipsychotic medication should be optimised,9 and clozapine may be
considered. However, there is insufficient evidence to recommend the use of any one
antipsychotic medication over another.

CHAPTER 4

Anxiety




<<<PAGE 491>>>

470  The Maudsley® Prescribing Guidelines in Psychiatry

CHAPTER 4

References
1. Department of Health and Social Care. UK chief medical officers’ guidelines on how to keep health risks from drinking alcohol to a low level.
2016; https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/alcohol-consumption-advice-on-low-risk-drinking.
2. National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence. Alcohol use disorders: diagnosis, assessment and management of harmful drinking and
alcohol dependence. Clinical Guidance [CG115]. 2011 (last checked July 2019); https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg115.
3. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Alcohol-use disorders: prevention. Public health guideline [PH24]. 2010; (last checked July
2019). https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ph24.
4. Babor T, et al. AUDIT: the alcohol use disorders identification test guidelines for use in primary care. 2nd edition. 2001; http://whqlibdoc.
who.int/hq/2001/WHO_MSD_MSB_01.6a.pdf?ua=1.
5. Stockwell T, et al. The severity of alcohol dependence questionnaire: its use, reliability and validity. Br J Addict 1983; 78:145–155.
6. Minozzi S, et al. Anticonvulsants for alcohol withdrawal. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2010; CD005064.
7. Amato L, et al. Efficacy and safety of pharmacological interventions for the treatment of the Alcohol Withdrawal Syndrome. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev 2011; CD008537.
8. Brathen G, et al. EFNS guideline on the diagnosis and management of alcohol-related seizures: report of an EFNS task force. Eur J Neurol
2005; 12:575–581.
9. Lingford-Hughes AR, et al. Evidence-based guidelines for the pharmacological management of substance abuse, harmful use, addiction and
comorbidity: recommendations from BAP. J Psychopharmacol 2012; 26:899–952.
10. NSW Government. Drug and alcohol withdrawal clinical practice guidelines. 2008; https://www1.health.nsw.gov.au/pds/ActivePDSDocuments/
GL2008_011.pdf.
11. Schuckit MA. Recognition and management of withdrawal delirium (delirium tremens). N Engl J Med 2014; 371:2109–2113.
12. Sullivan JT, et al. Assessment of alcohol withdrawal: the revised clinical institute withdrawal assessment for alcohol scale (CIWA-Ar). Br J
Addict 1989; 84:1353–1357.
13. Gossop M, et al. A Short Alcohol Withdrawal Scale (SAWS): development and psychometric properties. Addict Biol 2002; 7:37–43.
14. National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence. Alcohol-use disorders: physical complications. Clinical Guidance [CG100] 2010 (last
updated April 2017); https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg100.
15. Thomson AD, et al. Time to act on the inadequate management of Wernicke’s encephalopathy in the UK. Alcohol Alcohol 2013; 48:4–8.
16. Thomson AD, et al. The Royal College of Physicians report on alcohol: guidelines for managing Wernicke’s encephalopathy in the accident
and Emergency Department. Alcohol Alcohol 2002; 37:513–521.
17. Day E, et al. Thiamine for prevention and treatment of Wernicke-Korsakoff Syndrome in people who abuse alcohol. Cochrane Database Syst
Rev 2013; 7:CD004033.
18. Thomson A, et al. Incidence of adverse reactions to parenteral thiamine in the treatment of Wernicke’s encephalopathy, and recommendations. Alcohol Alcohol 2019; 54:609–614.
19. BNF Online. British national formulary. 2020; https://www.medicinescomplete.com/mc/bnf/current.
20. Rösner S, et al. Acamprosate for alcohol dependence. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2010; Cd004332.
21. Donoghue K, et al. The efficacy of acamprosate and naltrexone in the treatment of alcohol dependence, Europe versus the rest of the world:
a meta-analysis. Addiction 2015; 110:920–930.
22. Rösner S, et al. Opioid antagonists for alcohol dependence. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2010; Cd001867.
23. Accord Healthcare Limited. Summary of Product Characteristics. Naltrexone Hydrochloride 50 mg Film-coated Tablets. 2014; https://www.
medicines.org.uk/emc/medicine/25878.
24. Krupitsky E, et al. Injectable extended-release naltrexone (XR-NTX) for opioid dependence: long-term safety and effectiveness. Addiction
2013; 108:1628–1637.
25. Soyka M, et al. Comparing nalmefene and naltrexone in alcohol dependence: are there any differences? Results from an indirect meta-analysis. Pharmacopsychiatry 2016; 49:66–75.
26. Palpacuer C, et al. Risks and benefits of nalmefene in the treatment of adult alcohol dependence: a systematic literature review and metaanalysis of published and unpublished double-blind randomized controlled trials. PLoS Med 2015; 12:e1001924.
27. Mutschler J, et al. Current findings and mechanisms of action of disulfiram in the treatment of alcohol dependence. Pharmacopsychiatry
2016; 49:137–141.
28. Minozzi S, et al. Baclofen for alcohol use disorder. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2018; 11:Cd012557.
29. Pani PP, et al. Anticonvulsants for alcohol dependence. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2014; Cd008544.
30. Kranzler HR, et al. A meta-analysis of the efficacy of gabapentin for treating alcohol use disorder. Addiction 2019; 114:1547–1555.
31. UK Teratology Information Service (UKTIS). 2020; www.uktis.org.
32. O’Malley SS, et al. Reduction of alcohol drinking in young adults by naltrexone: a double-blind, placebo-controlled, randomized clinical trial
of efficacy and safety. J Clin Psychiatry 2015; 76:e207–e213.
33. Miranda R, et al. Effects of naltrexone on adolescent alcohol cue reactivity and sensitivity: an initial randomized trial. Addict Biol 2014;
19:941–954.
34. Pettinati HM, et al. Gender differences with high-dose naltrexone in patients with co-occurring cocaine and alcohol dependence. J Subst
Abuse Treat 2008; 34:378–390.
35. Public Health England. Better care for people with co-occurring mental health and alcohol/drug use conditions. A guide for commissioners
and service providers. 2017; https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/625809/Co-occurring_mental_
health_and_alcohol_drug_use_conditions.pdf.




<<<PAGE 517>>>

496  The Maudsley® Prescribing Guidelines in Psychiatry

CHAPTER 4

Naltrexone in relapse prevention
Evidence for the effectiveness of naltrexone as a treatment for relapse prevention in
opioid misusers has been inconclusive.79 However, naltrexone has been found by NICE
to be a cost-effective treatment strategy in aiding abstinence from opioid misuse for
those who prefer an abstinence programme, are fully informed of the potential adverse
effects and benefits of treatment, are highly motivated to remain on treatment and have
a partner supporting concordance.80 A naltrexone implant, not currently licensed in the
UK, may also have a role to play in reducing opioid use in a motivated population of
patients.81
Close monitoring is particularly important when naltrexone is initiated because of
the higher risk of fatal overdose at this time. Discontinuation of naltrexone may also be
associated with an increase in inadvertent overdose from illicit opioids. Thus, supervision of naltrexone administration and careful choice of who has prescribed it (those
who are abstinence focused and motivated) is very important. Moreover, people taking
naltrexone often experience adverse effects of unease (dysphoria), depression and
insomnia, which can lead to relapse to illicit opioid use while on naltrexone treatment,
or failure to continue on treatment. The dysphoria may be caused by either withdrawal
from illicit drugs or by the naltrexone treatment itself, emphasising the importance of
prescribing naltrexone as part of a care programme that includes psychosocial therapy
and general support.80
Initiating naltrexone
Naltrexone has the propensity to cause a severe withdrawal reaction in patients who
are either currently taking opioid drugs or who were previously taking opioid drugs
and there has not been a sufficient ‘wash-out’ period before administering naltrexone.
The minimum recommended interval between stopping the opioid and starting naltrexone depends on the opioid used, duration of use and the amount taken as a last
dose. Opioid agonists with long half-lives such as methadone will require a wash-out
period of up to 10 days, whereas shorter acting opioids such as heroin, morphine or
fentanyl may only require up to 7 days. Experience with buprenorphine indicates that
a wash-out period of up to 7 days is sufficient if the final buprenorphine dose is >2mg,
and duration of use >2 weeks. In some cases naltrexone may be started within 2–3 days
of a patient stopping (e.g. if final buprenorphine dose <2mg and duration of use <2
weeks).
A test dose of naloxone (0.2–0.8mg, which has a much shorter half-life than naltrexone), may be given to the patient as an IM dose prior to starting naltrexone treatment.
Any withdrawal symptoms precipitated will be of shorter duration than if precipitated
by naltrexone.
Patients must be advised of the risk of withdrawal before giving the dose. It is worth
thoroughly questioning the patient as to whether they have taken any opioid containing
preparation unknowingly (e.g. over-the-counter analgesic).




<<<PAGE 518>>>

Addictions and substance misuse  497

Important points regarding prescribing naltrexone
■■

Ensure the client is fully informed of the increased risk of fatal opioid overdose.

Following detoxification and any period of abstinence, an individual’s tolerance to opioids will
decrease markedly. At such a time, using opioids puts the individual at greatly increased risk of
overdose.
■■ Discontinuation of naltrexone may also be associated with an increase in inadvertent overdose
from illicit opioids, emphasising the need for close monitoring and support of the client at this
time.
■■

An initial dose of 25mg naltrexone should be administered after a suitable opioid-free
interval (and naloxone challenge if appropriate). The patient should be monitored for
4 hours after the first dose for symptoms of opioid withdrawal. Symptomatic medication for withdrawal (e.g. lofexidine) should be available for use, if necessary, on the first
day of naltrexone dosing (withdrawal symptoms may last up to 4–8 hours). Once the
patient has tolerated this low naltrexone dose, subsequent doses can be increased to
50mg daily as a maintenance dose.
Naltrexone is contraindicated in patients with hepatic dysfunction, and LFTs should
be monitored during treatment.

Pain control in patients on OST
Analgesia for methadone-prescribed patients
Non-opioid analgesics should be used in preference (e.g. paracetamol, NSAIDs) initially
where appropriate. If opioid analgesia (e.g. codeine, dihydrocodeine and morphine) is
indicated due to the type and severity of the pain, then this should be titrated accordingly for pain relief in line with usual analgesic protocols.
In the case of patients prescribed methadone, if an opioid analgesic is appropriate, a
non-methadone opioid may be co-prescribed, i.e. it is not necessary to ‘rationalise’ the
patient’s entire opioid requirements to one drug.82 Titrating the methadone dose to
provide analgesia may be appropriate in certain circumstances but this should only be
carried out by experienced specialists.
As outlined elsewhere in this chapter, patients taking buprenorphine or naltrexone
may be relatively refractory to opioids prescribed for analgesia, although in practice if
a patient on buprenorphine requires treatment for acute pain, an additional opioid may
be titrated against response.19 If naltrexone is stopped to allow for the prescribing of
opioid analgesia, careful monitoring will be required because of the increased risk of
both relapse and overdose.35,82
Patients with a history of substance misuse may also need acute pain management in
hospital following surgery, trauma or other illness. The primary objectives during the

CHAPTER 4

Dose of naltrexone




<<<PAGE 523>>>

CHAPTER 4

502  The Maudsley® Prescribing Guidelines in Psychiatry

75. Lingford-Hughes AR, et al. BAP updated guidelines: evidence-based guidelines for the pharmacological management of substance abuse,
harmful use, addiction and comorbidity: recommendations from BAP. J Psychopharmacol 2012; 26:899–952.
76. National Institute for Clinical Excellence. Drug misuse in over 16s: opioid detoxification. Clinical Guidance 52. 2007; https://www.nice.org.
uk/guidance/cg52.
77. National Institute for Clinical Excellence. Drug misuse in over 16s: psychosocial interventions. Clinical Guidance [CG51]. 2007; (last
checked July 2016). https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg51.
78. Nosyk B, et al. Defining dosing pattern characteristics of successful tapers following methadone maintenance treatment: results from a population-based retrospective cohort study. Addiction 2012; 107:1621–1629.
79. Minozzi S, et al. Oral naltrexone maintenance treatment for opioid dependence. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2011; 4:CD001333.
80. National Institute for Clinical Excellence. Naltrexone for the management of opioid dependence. Technology Appraisal [TA115]. 2007
(reviewed November 2010); https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ta115.
81. Kunoe N, et al. Naltrexone implants after in-patient treatment for opioid dependence: randomised controlled trial. Br J Psychiatry 2009;
194:541–546.
82. The British Pain Society, et al. Pain and substance misuse: improving the patient experience. A consensus statement prepared by The British
Pain Society in collaboration with The Royal College of Psychiatrists, The Royal College of General Practitioners and The Advisory Council
on the Misuse of Drugs. 2007; http://www.britishpainsociety.org/book_drug_misuse_main.pdf.
83. Winklbaur B, et al. Treating pregnant women dependent on opioids is not the same as treating pregnancy and opioid dependence: a knowledge synthesis for better treatment for women and neonates. Addiction 2008; 103:1429–1440.
84. Finnegan LP. Neonatal abstinence syndrome. in RA Hoekelman, et al., ed. Primary pediatric care. St Louis: Mosby 1992; 1367–1378.
85. Winklbaur B, et al. Opioid dependence and pregnancy. Curr Opin Psychiatry 2008; 21:255–259.
86. Minozzi S, et al. Maintenance agonist treatments for opiate-dependent pregnant women. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2013; 12:CD006318.
87. Fischer G, et al. Methadone versus buprenorphine in pregnant addicts: a double-blind, double-dummy comparison study. Addiction 2006;
101:275–281.
88. Holmes AP, et al. Breastfeeding considerations for mothers of infants with neonatal abstinence syndrome. Pharmacotherapy 2017;
37:861–869.




<<<PAGE 780>>>

Drug treatment of other psychiatric conditions   759

there is no robust evidence to support the use of antidepressants in treating depressed
mood or impulsivity in people with BPD.10,11

Mood-stabilisers
Up to a half of people with BPD may be also be diagnosed with a bipolar spectrum
disorder26 (although such diagnoses are rather controversial) and mood-stabilisers
are commonly prescribed.2 There is some evidence that mood stabilisers reduce
impulsivity, anger and affect dysregulation in people with BPD.10,11 Lithium is
licensed for the control of aggressive behaviour or intentional self-harm.27 A large
RCT of lamotrigine found it had no effect on any symptom domain.28 Mifepristone
is also ineffective.29

Memantine
An RCT of 33 subjects found adjunctive memantine 20mg a day to be more effective
than placebo30 and well tolerated. More trials are needed.

Opioid antagonists
Very limited evidence supports the efficacy of naltrexone in reducing self-harm and dissociative symptoms,12,31 but there are no definitive trials supporting the effectiveness of
naltrexone in the treatment of patients with BPD.

Drug treatments are often used during periods of crisis when symptoms can be severe,
distressing and potentially life-threatening. In BPD these symptoms can be expected to
wax and wane.3 Consequently, drug therapy may then be required intermittently, and
with each episode, the decision to prescribe needs to be informed by a careful
consideration of the relative harms and benefits of medication. It is generally easy to see
when treatment is required, but much more difficult to decide when modest gains are
worthwhile and whether or not continuation is likely to be necessary. The use of psychotropic drugs is not without harm, so treatment should always take the form of a
rigorously evaluated short-term trial.
NICE9 recommend that during periods of crisis, time-limited treatment with a sedative drug may be helpful. Anticipated side effect profile and potential toxicity in overdose should guide choice. For example, benzodiazepines (particularly short-acting
drugs) can cause disinhibition in this group of patients,32 potentially compounding
problems. Sedative antipsychotics can cause EPS and/or considerable weight gain, and
tricyclic antidepressants are particularly toxic in overdose. A sedative antihistamine
such as promethazine (25–50mg) is usually well tolerated and may be a helpful
short-term treatment when used as part of a coordinated care plan. Its adverse effects
(dry mouth, constipation), deleterious effects on sleep architecture and lack of clear
anxiolytic effects militate against longer term use.

CHAPTER 9

Management of crisis




<<<PAGE 823>>>

CHAPTER 10

802  The Maudsley® Prescribing Guidelines in Psychiatry

33. Deb S, et al. The effectiveness of mood stabilizers and antiepileptic medication for the management of behaviour problems in adults with
intellectual disability: a systematic review. J Intellect Disabil Res 2008; 52:107–113.
34. Ruedrich S, et al. Effect of divalproex sodium on aggression and self-injurious behaviour in adults with intellectual disability: a retrospective
review. J Intellect Disabil Res 1999; 43(Pt 2):105–111.
35. Donovan SJ, et al. Divalproex treatment for youth with explosive temper and mood lability: a double-blind, placebo-controlled crossover
design. Am J Psychiatry 2000; 157:818–820.
36. Unwin GL, et al. Use of medication for the management of behavior problems among adults with intellectual disabilities: a clinicians’ consensus survey. Am J Ment Retard 2008; 113:19–31.
37. Pary RJ. Towards defining adequate lithium trials for individuals with mental retardation and mental illness. Am J Ment Retard 1991;
95:681–691.
38. Craft M, et al. Lithium in the treatment of aggression in mentally handicapped patients: a double-blind trial. Br J Psychiatry 1987;
150:685–689.
39. Malone RP, et al. A double-blind placebo-controlled study of lithium in hospitalized aggressive children and adolescents with conduct disorder. Arch Gen Psychiatry 2000; 57:649–654.
40. Yuan J, et al. Lithium treatment is safe in children with intellectual disability. Front Mol Neurosci 2018; 11:425.
41. Campbell M, et al. Naltrexone in autistic children: an acute open dose range tolerance trial. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 1989;
28:200–206.
42. Barrett RP, et al. Effects of naloxone and naltrexone on self-injury: a double-blind, placebo-controlled analysis. Am J Ment Retard 1989;
93:644–651.
43. Mouaffak F, et al. Kleptomania treated with naltrexone in a patient with intellectual disability. J Psychiatry Neurosci 2020; 45:71–72.
44. Sabus A, et al. Management of self-injurious behaviors in children with neurodevelopmental disorders: a pharmacotherapy overview.
Pharmacotherapy 2019; 39:645–664.




<<<PAGE 927>>>

906  The Maudsley® Prescribing Guidelines in Psychiatry

approximately 14 hours when given with glucuronidation-inducing drugs such as carbamazepine or phenytoin. The half-life is increased to approximately 70 hours when
given with valproate. This means that the time before complete re-titration is necessary
therefore varies between 3 and 7 days, depending on the other drugs prescribed.1

Table 14.1 Restarting medication up to two weeks after stopping oral treatment (data obtained from EU
regulatory documents (SPCs)2)

CHAPTER 14

Drugs that require re-titration

Drug

Time after which
re-titration must
be performed

Clozapine

48 hours

See ‘Re-starting
clozapine after
after a break in
treatment’ in
Chapter 1

Lamotrigine

3–7 days

See discussion in
the text

3 days
Methadone
Buprenorphine 3 days

Further guidance

See ‘Opioid
dependence’ in
Chapter 4

Paliperidone
long-acting
injection

Depends on
formulation

See ‘Paliperidone
palmitate
long-acting
injection’ in
Chapter 1

Aripiprazole
long-acting
injection

>5 weeks if 2nd or
3rd dose missed

See ‘Aripiprazole
long-acting
injection’ in
Chapter 1

Drugs that are
usually safe for
restarting at
the previous
dose
Acamprosate
Asenapine
Fluoxetine
Haloperidol
Isocarboxazid
Lofepramine
Methylphenidate
Phenelzine
Sulpiride
Tranylcypromine
Valproate

Drugs that are probably
safe for restarting at
the previous dose
Antipsychotics (except
clozapine, quetiapine and
risperidone)
Carbamazepine
Cholinesterase inhibitors
CNS stimulants
Disulfiram
Lithium (titration advised if
renal function has changed)
MAOIs
Memantine
Naltrexone
Other antidepressants (but
beware loss of tolerance to
sedative effects)
Pregabalin
SSRIs
TCAs (but beware loss of
tolerance to sedative and
hypotensive effects)

>6 weeks in
chronic treatment
CNS, central nervous system; MAOI, monoamine oxidase inhibitor; SSRI, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor; TCA,
tricyclic antidepressant.

References
1. Aurobindo Pharma – Milpharm Ltd. Summary of Product Characteristics. Lamotrigine 25mg Tablets. 2019; https://www.medicines.org.uk/
emc/product/4736/smpc.
2. EMC. https://www.medicines.org.uk/emc/; accessed June 2020.




<<<PAGE 946>>>

Miscellany  925

Examples of acceptable use of drugs outside their product licences/labels
Table 14.6 gives examples of common unlicensed uses of drugs in psychiatric practice.
These examples would all fulfil the Bolam and Bolitho criteria in principle. An exhaustive list of unlicensed uses is impossible to prepare as: the evidence base is constantly
changing and because the expertise and experience of prescribers varies. A particular
strategy may be justified in the hands of a specialist in psychopharmacology based on
a tertiary referral centre but be much more difficult to justify if initiated by someone
with a special interest in psychotherapy who rarely prescribes.

Drug/drug group

Unlicensed use(s)

Further information

Second generation
antipsychotics

Psychotic illness other than
schizophrenia

Licensed indications vary markedly, and in most cases
are unlikely to reflect real differences in efficacy
between drugs

Clozapine

Bipolar disorder

Substantial evidence to support efficacy when
standard treatments have failed to control symptoms

Cyproheptadine

Akathisia

Some evidence to support efficacy in this distressing
and difficult to treat adverse effect of antipsychotics

Fluoxetine/Sertraline

Generalised anxiety disorder

Substantial supporting evidence

Ketamine (racemate)

Refractory depression

Substantial evidence with both racemate and
S-isomer

Melatonin (circadin)

Insomnia in children

Licence covers adults >55 years only. Probably
preferable to unlicensed formulations of melatonin

Methylphenidate

ADHD in children under 6

Established clinical practice

Naltrexone

Self-injurious behaviour in
people with learning disabilities

Limited evidence base
Acceptable in specialist hands

Sodium valproate

Treatment and prophylaxis of
bipolar disorder

Established clinical practice
Evidence from other valproate preparations

Note that some drugs do not have a UK licence for any indication. Two commonly
prescribed examples in psychiatric practice are immediate release formulations of melatonin (used to treat insomnia in children and adolescents) and pirenzepine (used to treat
clozapine-induced hypersalivation). Awareness of the evidence base and documentation
of potential benefits, side effects and patient consent are especially important here.

References
1. Datapharm Communications Ltd. Summary of product characteristics. Electronic Medicines Compendium 2020; http://www.medicines.org.
uk/emc.
2. Maher AR, et al. Efficacy and comparative effectiveness of atypical antipsychotic medications for off-label uses in adults: a systematic review
and meta-analysis. JAMA 2011; 306:1359–1369.
3. Bolam v Friern Barnet Hospital Management Committee. The Weekly Law Reports 1957; 1:582.
4. Bolitho v City and Hackney Health Authority. The Weekly Law Reports 1997; 3:1151.

CHAPTER 14

Table 14.6 Examples of common unlicensed uses of drugs in psychiatric practice


