<<<PAGE 353>>>

Chapter 7: Treatments for Mood Disorders

Figure 7-68 Tricyclic antidepressants
and overdose. Tricyclic
antidepressants block voltagesensitive sodium channels in the brain
(top) and heart (bottom). In overdose,
this action can lead to coma, seizures,
arrhythmia, and even death.

Overdose

H1

coma
sodium
channel

seizures

H1

arrhythmia
sodium
channel

are barely prescribed any more today. Only about one
in every 3,000 to 5,000 prescriptions for a drug to treat
depression is a MAOI and only a few hundred experts
prescribe MAOIs out of the hundreds of thousands
who prescribe other drugs for depression in the US.
Prescribing MAOIs is beginning to become a lost art
in psychopharmacology as many familiar with them
learned to use MAOIs before the 1990s when SSRIs were
introduced and largely replaced MAOIs. Most of these
prescribers of MAOIs are now retiring from practice.
Nevertheless, MAOIs are a most powerful drug class
for unipolar depression and those who prescribe them
have seen many patients who respond to nothing else
get better on MAOIs. The reader who is an advanced
psychopharmacologist should gain familiarity and
experience with these agents so that patients who still
need them can get them. The reader is referred to specific
reviews on MAOIs including some of the author, to help
navigate dietary restrictions and drug interactions.
The MAOIs phenelzine, tranylcypromine,
isocarboxazid, and selegiline are all irreversible enzyme

death

7

inhibitors, and thus enzyme activity returns only after
new enzyme is synthesized about 2–3 weeks later.
Amphetamine is also a weak but reversible MAOI; some
MAOIs have properties related to amphetamine. For
example, tranylcypromine has a chemical structure
modeled on amphetamine, and thus in addition to MAOI
properties, it also has amphetamine-like dopaminereleasing properties. The MAOI selegiline itself does not
have amphetamine-like properties, but is metabolized
to both l-amphetamine and l-methamphetamine. Thus,
there is a close mechanistic link between some MAOIs and
additional amphetamine-like dopamine-releasing actions.
MAO Subtypes

MAO exists in two subtypes, A and B. The A form
preferentially metabolizes the monoamines most closely
linked to depression (i.e., serotonin and norepinephrine)
whereas the B form preferentially metabolizes trace
amines such as phenethylamine (see Chapter 5 and
Figures 5-64 through 5-66 for further discussion on
trace amines). Both MAO-A and MAO-B metabolize
337


