<<<PAGE 309>>>

Chapter 7: Treatments for Mood Disorders

If blockade of SERT explains the shared clinical and
pharmacological actions of SSRIs, what explains their
differences? Although there is no generally accepted
explanation that accounts for the commonly observed
clinical phenomena of different efficacy and tolerability
of various SSRIs in individual patients, it makes sense to
consider those unique pharmacological characteristics
of the six SSRIs that are not shared with each other as
candidates to explain the broad range of individual
patient reactions to different SSRIs (Figures 7-16 through
7-21). Each SSRI has secondary pharmacological actions
other than SERT blockade, and no two SSRIs have
identical secondary pharmacological characteristics.
Whether these secondary binding profiles can account for
the differences in efficacy and tolerability in individual
patients remains to be proven. However, it does lead to
provocative hypothesis generation and gives a rational
basis for psychopharmacologists trying more than one of
these agents rather than thinking “they are all the same.”
Sometimes only an empiric trial of different SSRIs will
lead to the best match of drug to an individual patient.
Fluoxetine: An SSRI with 5HT2C Antagonist Properties

In addition to serotonin reuptake inhibition, fluoxetine
also has 5HT2C antagonist actions that may explain
many of its unique clinical properties (Figure 7-16).
5HT2C antagonism may contribute to its antidepressant
actions and also to its efficacy in other disorders,
especially in eating disorders. Other drugs for unipolar

fluoxetine
5HT2C

NET

SERT
SERT

Figure 7-16 Fluoxetine. In addition to serotonin reuptake
inhibition, fluoxetine has norepinephrine reuptake inhibition
(NRI) and serotonin 2C antagonist actions (5HT2C). 5HT2C
antagonism can lead to disinhibition of norepinephrine and
dopamine; this action may be responsible for fluoxetine’s
activating effects. NRI may be clinically relevant only at very high
doses.

depression with 5HT2C antagonist properties include
trazodone, mirtazapine, agomelatine, and some tricyclic
antidepressants, and these will be described below.
Finally, two serotonin 2A/dopamine 2 antagonists,
quetiapine (Figure 5-45) and olanzapine (Figure 5-44),
also have potent 5HT2C antagonist properties. Both
agents are used to treat psychosis (see Chapter 5) but are
also approved for augmenting other drugs for unipolar
depression, treatment-resistant unipolar depression,
and bipolar depression. Blocking serotonin action at
5HT2C receptors disinhibits (i.e., enhances) release of
both norepinephrine and dopamine, actions theoretically
beneficial for the treatment of depression (see Chapter
6 and Figure 6-24B and also the discussion below on
agomelatine).
The good news about 5HT2C antagonism may be
that it is generally activating, and the reason why
many patients, even from the first dose, detect an
energizing and fatigue-reducing effect of fluoxetine, with
improvement in concentration and attention as well. This
mechanism is perhaps best matched to depressed patients
with reduced positive affect (Figure 6-41), hypersomnia,
psychomotor retardation, apathy, and fatigue. Fluoxetine
is also approved in some countries in combination with
olanzapine for treatment-resistant unipolar depression
and for bipolar depression. Since olanzapine also has
5HT2C antagonist actions (Figure 5-44), it may be that
adding the 5HT2C antagonist actions of olanzapine to
those of fluoxetine could theoretically lead to further
enhanced dopamine and norepinephrine release in
the cortex to mediate the antidepressant actions of this
combination. 5HT2C antagonism may also contribute
to the anti-bulimia effect of higher doses of fluoxetine,
the only SSRI approved for the treatment of this eating
disorder. The bad news could be that 5HT2C antagonist
actions of fluoxetine may contribute to this agent being
sometimes less well matched to patients with agitation,
insomnia, and anxiety, who may experience unwanted
activation and even a panic attack if given an agent that
further activates them.
Fluoxetine also has weak norepinephrine reuptake
blocking properties (Figure 7-16), which may become
clinically relevant at very high doses. Fluoxetine has
a long half-life (2–3 days), and its active metabolite
an even longer half-life (2 weeks). The long halflife is advantageous in that it seems to reduce the
withdrawal reactions that are characteristic of sudden
discontinuation of some SSRIs, but it also means that
it takes a long time to clear the drug and its active

293

7




<<<PAGE 310>>>

STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

metabolite after discontinuing fluoxetine, and prior
to starting other agents such as a monoamine oxidase
(MAO) inhibitor. Fluoxetine is not only available as a
once-daily formulation, but also as a once-weekly oral
dosage formulation.
Sertraline: An SSRI with Dopamine Transporter (DAT)
Inhibition and σ1 Binding

This SSRI has two candidate mechanisms that
distinguish it: dopamine transporter (DAT) inhibition
and σ1 receptor binding (Figure 7-17). The DAT
inhibitory actions are controversial since they are
weaker than the SERT inhibitory actions, thus leading
some experts to suggest that there is not sufficient
DAT occupancy by sertraline to be clinically relevant.
However, as will be discussed later in the section on
norepinephrine–dopamine reuptake inhibitors (NDRIs),
it is not clear that high degrees of DAT occupancy
are necessary or even desirable in order to contribute
to antidepressant actions. That is, perhaps only a
small amount of DAT inhibition is sufficient to cause
improvement in energy, motivation, and concentration,
especially when added to another action such as SERT
inhibition. In fact, high-impact DAT inhibition is the
property of reinforcing stimulants, including cocaine
and methamphetamine, and would not generally be
desired in a drug for depression (see discussion of DAT
inhibitors in Chapter 11 on ADHD and Chapter 13 on
impulsivity, compulsivity, and addiction).

sertraline

Anecdotally, clinicians have observed the mild and
desirable activating actions of sertraline in some patients
with “atypical depression,” improving symptoms of
hypersomnia, low energy, and mood reactivity. A favorite
combination of some clinicians for depressed patients is
to add bupropion to sertraline (i.e., Wellbutrin to Zoloft,
sometimes called “Well-oft”), adding together the weak
DAT inhibitory properties of each agent. Clinicians have
also observed the overactivation of some patients with
panic disorder by sertraline, thus requiring slower dose
titration in some patients with anxiety symptoms. All of
these actions of sertraline are consistent with weak DAT
inhibitory actions contributing to its clinical portfolio of
actions.
The σ1 actions of sertraline are not well understood,
but might contribute to its anxiolytic effects and
especially to its effects in psychotic and delusional
depression, where sertraline may have advantageous
therapeutic effects compared to some other SSRIs.
Paroxetine: An SSRI with Muscarinic Anticholinergic and
Norepinephrine Transporter (NET) Inhibitory Actions

This SSRI tends to be more calming, even sedating, early
in treatment compared to the more activating actions of
both fluoxetine and sertraline discussed above. Perhaps
the mild anticholinergic actions of paroxetine contribute
to this clinical profile (Figure 7-18). Paroxetine also
has weak norepinephrine transporter (NET) inhibitory
properties, which could contribute to its efficacy in
depression, especially at high doses. The advantages of

paroxetine
DAT

M1

NET

SERT
SERT

SERT
SERT

NOS

Figure 7-17 Sertraline. Sertraline has dopamine transporter
(DAT) inhibition and σ1 receptor binding in addition to serotonin
reuptake inhibition (SRI). The clinical relevance of sertraline’s
DAT inhibition is unknown, although it may improve energy,
motivation, and concentration. Its sigma properties may
contribute to anxiolytic actions and may also be helpful in
patients with psychotic depression.

294

Figure 7-18 Paroxetine. In addition to serotonin reuptake
inhibition, paroxetine has mild anticholinergic actions
(M1), which can be calming or possibly sedating; weak
norepinephrine transporter (NET) inhibition, which may
contribute to further antidepressant actions; and inhibition of
the enzyme nitric oxide synthase (NOS), which may contribute to
sexual dysfunction.




<<<PAGE 311>>>

Chapter 7: Treatments for Mood Disorders

dual serotonin plus norepinephrine reuptake inhibiting
properties, or SNRI actions, are discussed below in the
section on SNRIs. It is possible that weak to moderate
NET inhibition of paroxetine may contribute importantly
to its antidepressant actions.
Paroxetine also inhibits the enzyme nitric oxide
synthase, which could theoretically contribute to
sexual dysfunction, especially in men. Paroxetine
is also notorious for causing withdrawal reactions
upon sudden discontinuation, with symptoms such
as akathisia, restlessness, gastrointestinal symptoms,
dizziness, and tingling, especially when suddenly
discontinued from long-term high-dose treatment. This
is possibly due not only to SERT inhibition properties,
since all SSRIs can cause discontinuation reactions,
but also to anticholinergic rebound when paroxetine
is rapidly discontinued. Paroxetine is available in a
controlled-release formulation, which may mitigate
some of its side effects, including discontinuation
reactions.
Fluvoxamine: An SSRI with σ1 Receptor Binding
Properties

This SSRI was among the first to be launched for the
treatment of depression worldwide, but was never
officially approved for depression in the US, so it has been
considered more of an agent for the treatment of OCD
in the US. Like sertraline, fluvoxamine binds at σ1 sites,
but this action is more potent for fluvoxamine than for
sertraline (Figure 7-19). The physiological function of
σ1 sites is still a mystery, and thus sometimes called the
“sigma enigma,” but has been linked both to anxiety and
psychosis. Preclinical studies suggest that fluvoxamine

may be an agonist at σ1 receptors, and that this property
may contribute an additional pharmacological action
to help explain fluvoxamine’s well-known anxiolytic
properties. Fluvoxamine also has shown therapeutic
activity in both psychotic and delusional depression,
where it, like sertraline, may have advantages over other
SSRIs.
Fluvoxamine is now available as a controlled-release
formulation, which makes once-daily administration
possible, unlike immediate-release fluvoxamine, whose
shorter half-life often requires twice-daily administration.
In addition, recent trials of controlled-release
fluvoxamine show impressive remission rates in both
OCD and social anxiety disorder, as well as possibly less
peak-dose sedation.
Citalopram: An SSRI with a “Good” and a “Bad”
Enantiomer

This SSRI is comprised of two enantiomers, R and S,
which are mirror images of each other (Figure 7-20).
The mixture of these enantiomers is known as racemic
citalopram, or commonly just as citalopram, and has
mild antihistamine properties that reside in the R
enantiomer. Racemic citalopram is generally one of
the better-tolerated SSRIs, and has favorable findings
in the treatment of depression in the elderly, but has a
somewhat inconsistent therapeutic action at the lowest
dose, often requiring dose increase to optimize treatment.
citalopram: R+S citalopram

fluvoxamine
S
ram
lop

cita

1H

R
rpo
lat
i

ma

c

SERT

Figure 7-19 Fluvoxamine. Fluvoxamine’s secondary properties
include actions at σ1 receptors, which may be anxiolytic as well
as beneficial for psychotic depression.

Figure 7-20 Citalopram. Citalopram consists of two
enantiomers, R and S. Some pharmacological evidence suggests
that the R enantiomer may be pharmacologically active at SERTs
in a manner that does not inhibit SERTs but actually interferes
with the ability of the active S enantiomer to inhibit SERTs. The R
enantiomer also has weak antihistamine properties.

295

7




<<<PAGE 318>>>

STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

7-33C). The bottom line is that NET inhibition increases
both NE and DA in the prefrontal cortex. Thus, SNRIs
have two-and-a-half mechanisms: boosting serotonin
throughout the brain, boosting NE throughout the brain,
and boosting DA in the prefrontal cortex (but not in other
DA projection areas).
Venlafaxine

Depending upon the dose, venlafaxine has different
degrees of inhibition of serotonin reuptake (most potent
and robust even at low doses) versus NE reuptake
(moderate potency and robust only at higher doses)
(Figure 7-28). However, there are no significant actions
on other receptors. It remains controversial whether
venlafaxine or other SNRIs have greater efficacy in
unipolar major depression than SSRIs, either in terms
of enhanced remission rates, more robust sustained
remission over long-term treatment, or greater efficacy
for treatment-resistant unipolar depression, but this does
seem plausible given two mechanisms and the boosting
of two monoamines. Venlafaxine is approved and widely
used for several anxiety disorders as well. Adding
NET inhibition likely accounts for two side effects of
venlafaxine in some patients: sweating and elevated blood
pressure.
Venlafaxine is available as an extended-release
formulation, which not only allows for once-daily
administration but also significantly reduces side
effects, especially nausea. In contrast to several other
psychotropic drugs available in controlled-release
formulations, extended-release venlafaxine is a
considerable improvement over the immediate-release
formulation, which has fallen into little or no use because
of unacceptable nausea and other side effects, especially
when immediate-release venlafaxine is started or when
it is stopped. However, venlafaxine even in controlledrelease formulation can cause withdrawal reactions,
sometimes quite bothersome, especially after sudden
discontinuation from high-dose long-term treatment.
Nevertheless, the controlled-release formulation is highly
preferred because of enhanced tolerability.
Desvenlafaxine

Venlafaxine is a substrate for CYP450 2D6, which
converts it to an active metabolite desvenlafaxine (Figure
7-28). Desvenlafaxine has greater NET inhibition relative
to SERT inhibition compared to venlafaxine. Normally,
after venlafaxine administration, the plasma levels of
venlafaxine are about half of those for desvenlafaxine.
However, this is highly variable, depending upon whether
302

the patient is taking another drug that is a CYP450 2D6
inhibitor, which shifts the plasma levels towards more
venlafaxine and less desvenlafaxine, also reducing the
relative amount of NET inhibition. Variability in plasma
levels of venlafaxine versus desvenlafaxine is also due
to genetic polymorphisms for CYP450 2D6, such that
poor metabolizers will shift the ratio of these two drugs
towards more parent venlafaxine and away from the
active metabolite desvenlafaxine, and thus reduce the
relative amount of NET inhibition. As a result of these
considerations, it can be somewhat unpredictable
how much NET inhibition a given dose of venlafaxine
will have in a given patient at a given time, whereas
this is more predictable for desvenlafaxine. Expert
clinicians have learned to solve this problem with skilled
dose titration of venlafaxine, but the development of
desvenlafaxine as a separate drug may also solve this
problem, with less need for dose titration and more
consistent NET inhibition at a given dose across all
patients.
Duloxetine

This SNRI, characterized pharmacologically by slightly
more potent SERT than NET inhibition (Figure 7-29), has
transformed how we think about depression and pain.
Classic teaching was that depression caused pain that was
psychic (as in “I feel your pain”) and not somatic (as in
“ouch”), and that psychic pain was secondary to emotional
suffering in depression; therefore, it was thought,
anything that made depression better would make psychic
pain better nonspecifically. Somatic pain was thus not
thought to be caused by depression, although depression
could supposedly make it worse, and classically somatic
pain was not treated with drugs for depression.
Studies with duloxetine have changed all this. Not
only does this SNRI relieve unipolar depression in the
absence of pain, but it also relieves pain in the absence
of depression. All sorts of pain are improved by this
SNRI, from diabetic peripheral neuropathic pain, to
fibromyalgia, to chronic musculoskeletal pain such
as that associated with osteoarthritis and low back
problems, and more. These findings of the efficacy
of duloxetine for multiple pain syndromes have also
validated that painful physical (somatic) symptoms
are a legitimate set of symptoms that accompany
depression and are not just a form of emotional pain.
The use of SNRIs such as duloxetine in pain syndromes
is discussed in Chapter 9. So, duloxetine has established
efficacy not only in unipolar depression and in chronic
pain, but also in patients with chronic painful physical




<<<PAGE 319>>>

Chapter 7: Treatments for Mood Disorders

symptoms of unipolar depression. Painful physical
symptoms are frequently ignored or missed by patients
and clinicians alike in the setting of unipolar major
depression, and until recently, the link of these symptoms
to major depression was not well appreciated, in part
because painful physical symptoms are not included
in the list of symptoms for the formal diagnostic
criteria for depression (see Chapter 6 and Figure 6-1).
Nevertheless, it is now widely appreciated that painful
physical symptoms are frequently associated with a
major depressive episode, and are also one of the leading
residual symptoms after initial treatment with drugs for
depression (Figure 7-5). It appears that the dual SNRI
actions of duloxetine and other SNRIs are superior to
the selective serotonergic actions of SSRIs for treatment
of conditions such as neuropathic pain of diabetes and
chronic painful physical symptoms associated with
depression. The role of NET inhibition seems to be
critical for the treatment not only of painful conditions
without depression, but also for painful physical
symptoms associated with depression. Duloxetine
has also shown efficacy in the treatment of cognitive
symptoms of depression that are prominent in geriatric
depression, possibly exploiting the pro-noradrenergic and
pro-dopaminergic consequences of NET inhibition in the
prefrontal cortex (see Figure 7-33).
Duloxetine can be given once a day, but this is usually
only a good idea after the patient has had a chance to
become tolerant to it after initiating it at twice-daily
dosing, especially during titration to higher doses.
Duloxetine may have a lower incidence of hypertension
and milder withdrawal reactions than venlafaxine.
Milnacipran

Milnacipran is the first SNRI marketed in Japan and many
European countries such as France, where it is currently
marketed as a drug for unipolar depression. In the US,
milnacipran is not approved for unipolar depression,
but is approved for fibromyalgia. Interestingly, it is the
other way around in Europe: milnacipran is approved for
unipolar depression but not approved for the treatment
of fibromyalgia. Milnacipran is a bit different from other
SNRIs in that it is a relatively more potent NET than
SERT inhibitor (Figure 7-30), whereas the others are
more potent SERT than NET inhibitors (Figures 7-28
and 7-29). This unique pharmacological profile may
explain milnacipran’s somewhat different clinical profile
compared to other SNRIs. Since noradrenergic actions
may be equally or more important for treatment of painrelated conditions compared to serotonergic actions, the

robust NET inhibition of milnacipran suggests that it may
be particularly useful in chronic pain related conditions,
not just fibromyalgia where it is approved, but possibly
as well for the painful physical symptoms associated with
unipolar depression and chronic neuropathic pain.
Milnacipran’s potent NET inhibition also suggests
a potentially favorable pharmacological profile for the
treatment of cognitive symptoms, including cognitive
symptoms of unipolar depression as well as cognitive
symptoms frequently associated with fibromyalgia,
sometimes called “fibro-fog.” Other clinical observations
possibly linked to milnacipran’s robust NET inhibition
are that it can be more energizing and activating than
other SNRIs. Common residual symptoms after treatment
with an SSRI include not only cognitive symptoms, but
also fatigue, lack of energy, and lack of interest, among
other symptoms (Figure 7-5). NET inhibition may be
related to observations that milnacipran may cause
more sweating and urinary hesitancy than some other
SNRIs. For patients with urinary hesitancy, generally
due theoretically to robust pro-noradrenergic actions at
bladder α1 receptors, an α1 antagonist can reduce these
symptoms. Milnacipran must generally be given twice
daily due to its shorter half-life.
Levomilnacipran

Milnacipran is actually a racemic mixture of two
enantiomers (Figure 7-30). The S or levo enantiomer
is the active enantiomer (Figure 7-31) and has been
independently developed for unipolar major depressive
disorder in the US, where it is mostly available. Like
racemic milnacipran, levomilnacipran has greater NET
inhibition than SERT inhibition and may target fatigue
and lack of energy as potential clinical advantages. Also,
it is dosed in a controlled-release formulation, so, unlike
racemic milnacipran, can be given only once a day.
Norepinephrine–Dopamine Reuptake Inhibitors
(NDRIs): Bupropion

For many years, the mechanism of action of bupropion
has been unclear and still remains somewhat
controversial. Bupropion itself only has weak reuptake
blocking properties for dopamine (DAT inhibition),
and for norepinephrine (NET inhibition) (Figures 7-34
and 7-35). No other specific or potent pharmacological
actions have been consistently identified for this
agent. Bupropion’s actions both as a drug for unipolar
depression and upon norepinephrine and dopamine
neurotransmission, however, have always appeared to be
more powerful than these weak properties could explain,
303

7




<<<PAGE 331>>>

Chapter 7: Treatments for Mood Disorders

Trazodone for Depression:
Serotonin Antagonist/
Reuptake Inhibitor (SARI)
α
1

Trazodone for Insomnia:
Multifunctional Neurotransmitter
Antagonist

α
2

A
T1
5H

5H

α1

H
1

T2

A

5HT1D

trazodone
mianserin

H1

SERT

5HT2A

B
HT2

5HT7

5H

T2
C

5

Figure 7-46 Trazodone at different doses. (Left)
High doses that recruit saturation of the
serotonin transporter (i.e., 150–600 mg) are
required for trazodone to have therapeutic
actions in depression. At this high dose,
trazodone is a multifunctional serotonergic
agent with antagonist actions at 5HT2A and
5HT2C receptors as well as additional serotonin
receptors. Trazodone is also an α1 and histamine
1 (H1) antagonist at these doses. (Right) At lower
doses of trazodone (i.e., 25–150 mg), it does
not saturate the serotonin transporter; it does,
however, retain antagonist actions at 5HT2A, α1,
and H1 receptors, with corresponding efficacy for
insomnia.

dose for depression
(150-600 mg)

dose for insomnia
(25-150 mg)

Figure 7-47 Trazodone IR versus XR
given once nightly. Shown here are
steady-state estimates of the plasma
trazodone levels from the hypnotic dosing
of 50, 75, or 100 mg once nightly of
trazodone immediate release (IR). Peak
drug concentrations are reached rapidly
with a similarly rapid fall off overnight.
The minimum levels estimated for
antidepressant actions of trazodone are
reached transiently, if at all, by hypnotic
dosing. By contrast, 300 mg of trazodone
extended release (XR) given once
nightly generates plasma levels that rise
slowly and never fall below minimum
antidepressant concentrations. Peak levels
of trazodone XR at 300 mg are about the
same as the peak levels of trazodone IR
at 100 mg.

Trazodone IR vs. XR Given Once Nightly
2.2
2
1.8
1.6
1.4

300 mg XR qhs

mg/L

1.2
1

100 mg IR qhs

minimum
antidepressant
concentration

0.8
0.65
0.5
0.3

75 mg IR qhs
50 mg IR qhs

0.1
0
23:30

4:00

8:00

12:00

16:00

20:00

23:30

hours

Vortioxetine

Vortioxetine is a drug approved for treating unipolar
depression and which causes SERT inhibition as well as
having antagonist actions at 5HT3 and 5HT7 receptors,
with agonist actions at 5HT1A receptors and weak
partial agonist to antagonist actions at 5HT1B/D receptors
(Figure 7-49). This unique blend of pharmacological
actions leads to downstream release of many different
neurotransmitters as will be explained here, and these
actions hypothetically lead to antidepressant effects
in unipolar depression, characterized by robust pro-

cognitive actions, especially improving processing speed.
The importance of cognitive symptoms in unipolar
depression is discussed in Chapter 6 as the possible
clinical consequence of loss of neurotrophic factors,
synapses, and neurons (Figures 6-27 through 6-31).
What is cognitive processing speed and what could
be the mechanism by which vortioxetine improves this
more than other antidepressants? “Cognition” is not a
single, simple brain function and “cognitive dysfunction”
is not a single, simple symptom. Cognitive impairment
that can be measured as part of the symptom profile
315

7




<<<PAGE 333>>>

Chapter 7: Treatments for Mood Disorders

vortioxetine
T
5H
1A

5H

T1B

5HT1D

SERT

T3

5HT7

5H

Figure 7-49 Vortioxetine. Vortioxetine is a serotonin reuptake
inhibitor and also has actions at several serotonin receptors,
including 5HT1A, 5HT1B, 5HT1D, 5HT3, and 5HT7.

somewhat whimsical way to categorize cognitive
dysfunction and to understand the role of improving
individual domains of cognition applicable to
psychopharmacology is illustrated in Figure 7-50 as the
“Fab Four” of cognition. Remember the original Fab
Four, the Beatles? Each musician can represent one of the
Fab Four of cognition as well. John, arguably the leader,
wanted all the attention, so he represents “attention,”
which some also refer to as concentration. Paul, perhaps
the brains of the operation and the writer of many of
the songs, is “executive function,” also called “problem
solving.” The quiet culture carrier of the group, George,
represents memory, of which there are many kinds,
short-term, long-term, verbal, and more. And finally, the
drummer, Ringo, represents processing speed, or pace.
You can imagine if any of these four is out of synch with
the other three, the music would be a disaster. All four
can potentially be compromised in psychiatric disorders.
It turns out that for depression, a test that measures a bit
of all these dimensions of cognition, but arguably most
prominently measures processing speed, is the DSST
(digital symbol substitution test). When processing speed
is slowed, just like an offbeat drummer in a band, overall
cognitive functioning can also feel like a disaster for a
depressed patient, lagging in cognitive performance,
with mental effort now becoming exhausting and
work productivity greatly reduced, all causing great
frustration. This simple, quick DSST can be useful in

7
Figure 7-50 The “Fab Four” of cognition. Cognition is not
a single, simple brain function. Rather, there are four major
cognitive domains, represented here by the four members
of the Beatles: attention or concentration (John), executive
function or problem solving (Paul), memory (George), and
processing speed (Ringo). All four domains work in concert to
keep cognition playing at its best; if any one of these domains
dysfunctions, then cognitive impairment can occur.

calibrating the objective decline in cognitive performance
of patients with subjective cognitive complaints, and in
tracking their improvement on treatment. Vortioxetine
improves cognition better than other antidepressants in
unipolar major depression, as demonstrated by superior
performance on the DSST measuring processing speed.
How does vortioxetine work as an antidepressant and
specifically how does it exert its superior pro-cognitive
effects?
SERT Inhibition and 5HT1A Agonism

To begin, vortioxetine is a SERT inhibitor and a 5HT1A
agonist, thus combining the actions already discussed
for SSRIs (Figures 7-10 through 7-15) and for combining
SERT inhibition with 5HT1A agonists (see Chapter 5 and
Figures 7-23 through 7-27). These mechanisms alone
are sufficient for antidepressant action since they raise
both serotonin levels (SERT inhibition) and the pro317




<<<PAGE 342>>>

STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

or more trials of the various first-line monoamine agents
discussed so far in this chapter.
Olanzapine–Fluoxetine Combination

Dopamine 2 (D2) antagonist actions likely account for
olanzapine’s approval in schizophrenia, bipolar mania,
and bipolar maintenance. 5HT2A antagonist actions
likely account for some of olanzapine’s ability to improve
symptoms of depression (5HT2A actions on mood are
discussed in Chapter 5 and illustrated in Figure 5-17C).
However, the fact that olanzapine works much better for
unipolar (or bipolar) depression when combined with
fluoxetine suggests that not only are serotonin reuptake
blocking properties a component of the antidepressant
effect of olanzapine–fluoxetine combination therapy,
but also 5HT2C antagonist actions (Figure 7-38). Both
olanzapine and fluoxetine are 5HT2C antagonists, and, in
combination, the net 5HT2C antagonism is greater than
with either drug alone. So, this olanzapine–fluoxetine
combination for depression could be considered a potent
SERT/5HT2C inhibitor. Although highly efficacious for
treatment-resistant unipolar depression (Table 7-1),
the combination of olanzapine with fluoxetine is often
associated with unacceptable weight gain and metabolic
disturbances. Olanzapine–fluoxetine combination is also
approved for bipolar depression and is discussed in the
section on bipolar depression below.
Quetiapine

Quetiapine (see Chapter 5 and Figure 5-45) is approved
for schizophrenia, acute bipolar mania, and bipolar
maintenance, likely due to its D2 antagonist actions.

Its efficacy as an augmenting agent to SSRIs/SNRIs for
depression is likely linked to the combined actions of
quetiapine and its active metabolite norquetiapine at both
5HT2C receptors (Figure 7-38) and at the norepinephrine
transporter (NET) (Figure 5-34; also described in Chapter
5 and illustrated in Figure 5-45). In addition, quetiapine
acts at other candidate receptors for antidepressant
efficacy including as an antagonist at 5HT2A (Chapter 5
and Figure 5-17C), 5HT7 (Figure 7-53C) and α2A receptors
(Figure 5-35), as well as an agonist at 5HT1A receptors
(Chapter 5 and Figure 5-22). All of these receptor actions
are hypothetically associated with antidepressant efficacy
and, added together, could make a theoretically powerful
synergy of antidepressant mechanisms (Table 7-1).
However, quetiapine can cause a great deal of sedation
and moderate weight gain and metabolic disturbance due
to its other receptor actions. Quetiapine is also approved
for bipolar depression and discussed in the section on
bipolar depression below.
Aripiprazole

This D2/5HT1A partial agonist (Chapter 5 and Figure
5-56) is approved for schizophrenia, acute bipolar
mania, and bipolar maintenance and is one of the most
extensively prescribed augmenting agents to SSRIs/
SNRIs in unipolar major depression (in the US) (Table
7-1). It likely acts in schizophrenia and bipolar mania
as a D2 partial agonist, whereas its prominent 5HT1A
partial agonist actions (Chapter 5 and Figure 5-22)
likely contribute to its antidepressant actions. Secondary
properties with potential antidepressant action may
also be contributory including D3, 5HT7, 5HT2C, and α2

Table 7-1 Serotonin/dopamine blockers for bipolar spectrum

Evidence of
efficacy in
mixed features

FDA-approved for
bipolar depression

Aripiprazole
Asenapine

Yes, MMX

FDA-approved
for bipolar
mania

FDA-approved
for bipolar
maintenance

FDA-approved for
major depressive
disorder

Yes

Yes

Yes (adjunct)

Yes

Yes

Brexpiprazole

Yes (adjunct)

Cariprazine

Yes, MMX, DMX

Yes

Lurasidone

Yes, DMX*

Yes

Olanzapine

Yes, MMX

Yes (with fluoxetine)

Yes

Yes

Yes (with fluoxetine)

Quetiapine

Yes, MMX

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes (adjunct)

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Risperidone
Ziprasidone

Yes, MMX

MMX, mania with mixed features; DMX, depression with mixed features.
*unipolar and bipolar depression.

326

Yes




<<<PAGE 496>>>

STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Noradrenergic Treatment of ADHD
Atomoxetine

Atomoxetine (Figure 11-37) is a selective norepinephrine
reuptake inhibitor (NRI). Sometimes called NET
inhibitors, the selective NRIs have known antidepressant
properties (discussed in Chapter 7). In terms of their
mechanism of therapeutic action in ADHD, it is the same
as just discussed for stimulants acting at the NETs here
in Chapter 11, and as previously discussed for drugs used
to treat depression in Chapter 7 and illustrated in Figure
7-33. Blocking NETs in the prefrontal cortex increases

Comparing the Molecular Actions of
Atomoxetine and Bupropion
DAT

NDRIs
NET

NE
neuron

DA
neuron

NRIs
NET

Figure 11-37 Comparing the molecular actions of atomoxetine
and bupropion. Atomoxetine is a selective norepinephrine
reuptake inhibitor (NRI), while bupropion is a norepinephrine–
dopamine reuptake inhibitor (NDRI). Both agents block the
norepinephrine transporters (NETs) in the prefrontal cortex,
which leads to an increase in both norepinephrine (NE) and
dopamine (DA) there (because NETs also transport dopamine).
NDRIs also block the dopamine transporters (DATs), which
are not present in the prefrontal cortex but are present in the
nucleus accumbens.

480

both DA and NE in the prefrontal cortex (Figure 11-38)
and is why NET inhibitors are thought to work in ADHD.
However, since there are few NE neurons and NETs in
nucleus accumbens, inhibiting NET does not lead to an
increase in either NE or DA there (Figure 11-38) and is
why NET inhibitors are thought not to have reinforcing,
abuse, or addiction potential.
Bupropion is a weak NRI and also a weak DAT
inhibitor known as a norepinephrine–dopamine reuptake
inhibitor (NDRI), and was previously discussed as a
treatment for depression in Chapter 7 and illustrated
in Figures 7-34 through 7-36; see also Figure 11-37).
Several tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs) have notable
NRI actions, such as desipramine and nortriptyline. All of
these agents with NRI properties have been utilized in the
treatment of ADHD, with varying amounts of success, but
only atomoxetine is well-investigated and approved for
this use in children and adults.
Atomoxetine’s hypothetical actions in ADHD patients
with stress and comorbidity states, presumably linked
to excessive and phasic DA and NE release, are shown
conceptually by comparing the untreated states in Figures
11-11 and 11-12 with the changes that theoretically follow
chronic treatment with atomoxetine in Figure 11-39. That
is, ADHD linked to conditions that are associated with
chronic stress and comorbidities is theoretically caused
by overly active NE and DA circuits in the prefrontal
cortex, resulting in an excess of phasic NE and DA
activity (Figure 11-13). When slow onset, long duration,
and essentially perpetual NET inhibition occurs in the
prefrontal cortex due to atomoxetine, this theoretically
restores tonic postsynaptic D1 and α2A-adrenergic
signaling, downregulates phasic NE and DA actions, and
desensitizes postsynaptic NE and DA receptors (Figure
11-39). The possible consequence of this is to reduce
stress as ADHD symptoms are improved. If so, decreases
in ADHD symptoms could potentially be accompanied
by decreases in anxiety, depression, and heavy drinking.
Unlike stimulant use, where the therapeutic actions are
at the mercy of plasma drug levels and momentary NET/
DAT occupancies, actions from long-term NRI actions
give 24-hour symptom relief, in much the same manner
as do SSRIs (selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors) and
SNRIs (serotonin–norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors)
for the treatment of depression and anxiety. Selective
NRIs generally have smaller effect sizes for reducing
ADHD symptoms than stimulants in short-term trials,
especially in patients without comorbidity. However,
NRIs are not necessarily inferior in ADHD patients who




<<<PAGE 497>>>

Atomoxetine in ADHD with Weak
Prefrontal NE and DA Signals
nucleus accumbens - no action

prefrontal cortex
NE
neuron

DA
neuron

VMAT2

DA
neuron

VMAT2

VMAT2

NET

atomoxetine
DA

NE

α2A

D1

+

+

DA

DAT

Figure 11-38 Atomoxetine in
ADHD with weak prefrontal
norepinephrine (NE) and dopamine
(DA) signals. Through its blockade of
norepinephrine transporters (NETs),
atomoxetine causes NE and DA levels
to increase in the prefrontal cortex,
where inactivation of both of these
neurotransmitters is largely due to
NETs (on the left). At the same time,
the relative lack of NETs in the nucleus
accumbens prevents atomoxetine from
increasing NE or DA levels in that brain
area, thus reducing the risk of abuse (on
the right). Other NET inhibitors would
be expected to have the same effects.

D1 D2
+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

NET inhibitors
atomoxetine (NRI), reboxetine (NRI), bupropion (NDRI), venlafaxine (SNRI),
duloxetine (SNRI), desvenlafaxine (SNRI), milnacipran (SNRI),
desipramine (TCA), nortriptyline (TCA)

Chronic Treatment with Atomoxetine in ADHD
with Excessive Prefrontal NE and DA Signals
prefrontal cortex
excessive NE and DA signals

stress

stress

Alpha-2A-Adrenergic Agonists

ADHD anxiety substance
abuse

chronic treatment with atomoxetine
NE
neuron

DA
neuron

VMAT2

VMAT2
NET

atomoxetine
DA

NE

α2A

D1

+

+
+

+

+

+

+

+

have not been previously treated with stimulants, nor in
ADHD patients who have been treated long term (more
than 8–11 weeks). NRIs may actually be preferred to
stimulants in patients with complex comorbidities, side
effects, or lack of response to stimulants.

RESPONSE
Figure 11-39 Chronic treatment with atomoxetine in ADHD
with excessive signals. ADHD linked to conditions that are
associated with chronic stress and comorbidities is theoretically
caused by overly active NE and DA circuits. Continuous
blockade of NETs could restore tonic postsynaptic D1 and α2Aadrenergic signaling, downregulate phasic NE and DA actions,
and desensitize postsynaptic NE and DA receptors.

Norepinephrine receptors are discussed in Chapter 6
and illustrated in Figures 6-14 through 6-16. There are
numerous subtypes of α-adrenergic receptors, from
presynaptic autoreceptors, generally of the α2A subtype
(Figure 6-14) to postsynaptic α2A, α2B, α2C, and α1
subtypes α1A, α1B, and α1D (Figures 6-14 through 6-16).
Alpha-2A receptors are widely distributed throughout the
central nervous system, with high levels in the cortex and
locus coeruleus. These receptors are thought to be the
primary mediators of the effects of NE in the prefrontal
cortex, regulating symptoms of inattention, hyperactivity,
and impulsivity in ADHD. Alpha-2B receptors are in high
concentrations in the thalamus and may be important
in mediating sedating actions of NE, while α2C receptors
are densest in striatum. Alpha-1 receptors generally have
opposing actions to α2 receptors, with α2 mechanisms
predominating when NE release is low or moderate
(i.e., for normal attention), but with α1 mechanisms
predominating at NE synapses when NE release is
high (e.g., associated with stress and comorbidity) and
contributing to cognitive impairment. Thus, selective
NRIs at low doses will first increase activity at α2A
481

11


