<<<PAGE 47>>>

Chapter 2: Transporters, Receptors, and Enzymes

Table 2-1 Presynaptic monamine transporters

Transporter

Common abbreviation

Gene family

Endogenous substrate

False substrate

Serotonin transporter

SERT

SLC6

Serotonin

Ecstasy (MDMA)

Norepinephrine transporter

NET

SLC6

Norepinephrine

Dopamine
Epinephrine
Amphetamine

Dopamine transporter

DAT

SLC6

Dopamine

Norepinephrine
Epinephrine
Amphetamine

2

MDMA = 3.4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine

Table 2-2 Neuronal and glial GABA and amino acid transporters

Transporter

Common
abbreviation

Gene
family

Endogenous
substrate

GABA transporter 1 (neuronal and glial)

GAT1

SLC6

GABA

GABA transporter 2 (neuronal and glial)

GAT2

SLC6

GABA beta-alanine

GABA transporter 3 (mostly glial)

GAT3

SLC6

GABA beta-alanine

GABA transporter 4 also called betaine transporter
(neuronal and glial)

GAT4
BGT1

SLC6

GABA betaine

Glycine transporter 1 (mostly glial)

GlyT1

SLC6

Glycine

Glycine tranporter 2 (neuronal)

GlyT2

SLC6

Glycine

Excitatory amino acid transporters 1–5

EAAT1–5

SLC1

L-glutamate
L-aspartate

2-2 and Figure 2-2A). The second subclass is comprised
of high-affinity glutamate transporters, also called the
solute carrier SLC1 gene family (Table 2-2 and Figure
2-2A).
In addition, there are three subclasses of intracellular
synaptic vesicle transporters for neurotransmitters:
the SLC18 gene family comprised both of vesicular
monoamine transporters (VMATs) for serotonin,
norepinephrine, dopamine, and histamine and the
vesicular acetylcholine transporter (VAChT); the SLC32
gene family and their vesicular inhibitory amino acid
transporters (VIAATs); and finally the SLC17 gene family
and their vesicular glutamate transporters, such as
vGluT1–3 (Table 2-3 and Figure 2-2B).
Monoamine Transporters (SLC6 Gene Family) as
Targets of Psychotropic Drugs

Reuptake mechanisms for monoamines utilize unique
presynaptic transporters (Figure 2-2A) in each different
monoamine neuron but the same vesicular transporter
(Figure 2-2B) in the synaptic vesicle membranes of all
three monoamine neurons plus histamine neurons. That

is, the unique presynaptic transporter for the monoamine
serotonin is known as SERT, for norepinephrine is
known as NET, and for dopamine, DAT (Table 2-1 and
Figure 2-2A). All three of these monoamines are then
transported into synaptic vesicles of their respective
neurons by the same vesicular transporter, known
as VMAT2 (vesicular monoamine transporter 2)
(Figure 2-2B and Table 2-3).
Although the presynaptic transporters for these three
neurotransmitters – SERT, NET, and DAT – are unique
in their amino acid sequences and binding affinities for
monoamines, each presynaptic monoamine transporter
nevertheless has appreciable affinity for amines other
than the one matched to its own neuron (Table 2-1).
Thus, if other transportable neurotransmitters or drugs
are in the vicinity of a given monoamine transporter, they
may also be transported into the presynaptic neuron by
hitchhiking a ride on certain transporters that can carry
them into the neuron.
For example, the norepinephrine transporter NET
has high affinity for the transport of dopamine as well as
for norepinephrine; the dopamine transporter DAT has
31




<<<PAGE 572>>>

STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

(N-methyl-D-aspartate) receptors and at postsynaptic
mGluR receptors (Figure 13-15).
Alcohol’s reinforcing effects are theoretically mediated
not only by its effects at GABA and glutamate synapses,
causing downstream dopamine release in the mesolimbic
pathway, but also by actions at opioid synapses within
mesolimbic reward circuitry (Figure 13-15). Opioid
neurons arise in the arcuate nucleus and project to the
VTA, synapsing on both glutamate and GABA neurons.
The net result of alcohol actions on opioid synapses is
thought to be the release of dopamine in the nucleus
acccumbens (Figure 13-15). Alcohol may do this by either
directly acting upon μ-opioid receptors or by releasing
endogenous opioids such as β-endorphin.
Treatment of Alcoholism

The actions of alcohol on opioid synapses create the
rationale for blocking μ-opioid receptors with antagonists
such as naltrexone or nalmefene (Figure 13-16).
Naltrexone and nalmefene (approved outside the US)
are μ-opioid antagonists that hypothetically block the
euphoria and “high” of heavy drinking. This theory is
supported by clinical trials that show that naltrexone
given either orally or by a 30-day-long acting injection
reduces days of heavy drinking (defined as five or more
drinks per day for a man and four or more for a woman)
and also increases the chances of attaining complete
abstinence from alcohol. If you drink when you take an
opioid antagonist, the opioids released by alcohol do not
lead to pleasure, so why bother drinking? Some patients
may also say, why bother taking the opioid antagonist,
of course, and relapse back into drinking alcohol.
Thus, a long-acting injection may be preferable but,
unfortunately, hardly any of this is prescribed.
Acamprosate is a derivative of the amino acid
taurine and interacts with both the glutamate system
to inhibit it, and with the GABA system to enhance it,
a bit like a form of “artificial alcohol” (compare Figure
13-15 with Figure 13-17). Thus, when alcohol is taken
chronically and then withdrawn, the adaptive changes
that it hypothetically causes in both the glutamate
system and the GABA system create a state of glutamate
overexcitement and even excitotoxicity as well as GABA
deficiency. To the extent that acamprosate can substitute
for alcohol in patients during withdrawal, the actions of
acamprosate mitigate the glutamate hyperactivity and
the GABA deficiency (Figure 13-17). This occurs because
acamprosate appears to have direct blocking actions on
certain glutamate receptors, particularly mGluR receptors

556

(specifically mGlu5 and perhaps mGlu2). One way or
another, acamprosate apparently reduces the glutamate
release associated with alcohol withdrawal (Figure 1317). Actions, if any, at NMDA receptors may be indirect,
as are actions at GABA systems, both of which may be
secondary downstream effects from acamprosate’s actions
on mGluR receptors (Figure 13-17). Although approved,
acamprosate is not prescribed very often.
Disulfiram is the classic drug for treating alcoholism.
It is an irreversible inhibitor of the liver enzyme aldehyde
dehydrogenase that normally metabolizes alcohol.
When alcohol is ingested in the presence of disulfiram,
alcohol’s metabolism is inhibited and the result is the
build-up of toxic levels of acetaldehyde. This creates an
aversive experience with flushing, nausea, vomiting,
and hypotension, hopefully conditioning the patient to
a negative rather than positive response to drinking.
Obviously, compliance is a problem with this agent, and
its aversive reactions are occasionally dangerous. Use of
disulfiram was greater in the past and is not prescribed
very often today.
Unapproved agents that may be effective in treating
alcoholism include the anticonvulsant topiramate and
the 5HT3 antagonist ondansetron. Several other agents
are used “off-label,” especially in Europe. The subject of
how to treat alcohol abuse and dependence is obviously
complex, and any psychopharmacological treatment
for alcoholism is more effective when integrated with
appropriate psychopharmacological treatment of
comorbid psychiatric disorders, as well as with structured
therapies such as 12-step programs, a topic which is
beyond the scope of this text.
Sedative Hypnotics

Sedative hypnotics include barbiturates and related agents
such as ethchlorvynol and ethinamate, chloral hydrate
and derivatives, and piperidinedione derivatives such as
glutethimide and methyprylon. Experts often include
alcohol, benzodiazepines, (discussed in Chapter 8), and
Z-drug hypnotics (discussed in Chapter 10) in this class
as well. The mechanism of action of sedative hypnotics
is basically thought to be the same as those described in
Chapter 7 (on drugs for depression), Chapter 8 (on drugs
for anxiety), and Chapter 10 (on drugs for insomnia) and
illustrated in Figure 13-14, namely as positive allosteric
modulators (PAMs) of either benzodiazepine-sensitive
(Figure 13-14A) or benzodiazepine-insensitive (Figure
13-14B) GABAA receptors, or both. Barbiturates are
much less safe in overdose than benzodiazepines, cause




<<<PAGE 573>>>

Chapter 13: Impulsivity, Compulsivity, and Addiction

Actions of μ-Opioid Antagonists Reducing
the Reward of Drinking
arcuate
nucleus
opioid
neuron

PFC
Glu neuron

VTA

nalmefene/
naltrexone

nalmefene/
naltrexone
VTA
DA neuron

GABA
interneuron

ß endorphin

GABA A receptor

Glu

GABA B receptor

GABA

NMDA receptor

DA

mGluR receptor

μ -opioid receptor
VSCC

μ -opioid antagonist

Figure 13-16 Actions of μ-opioid antagonists in the ventral tegmental area (VTA). Opioid neurons form synapses in the VTA with
GABAergic interneurons and with presynaptic nerve terminals of glutamate (Glu) neurons. Alcohol either acts directly upon μ-opioid
receptors or causes release of endogenous opioids such as enkephalin; in either case, the result is increased dopamine (DA) release
to the nucleus accumbens. Mu-opioid receptor antagonists such as naltrexone or nalmefene block the pleasurable effects of alcohol
mediated by μ-opioid receptors.

13

557




<<<PAGE 577>>>

Chapter 13: Impulsivity, Compulsivity, and Addiction

possible, it is rarely successful long term. Of those
opioid addicts who enter residential rehabilitation and
treatment for 30–90 days off all drugs, some analyses
suggest relapse back into opioid abuse as high as
60–80% within a month and 90–95% by 3 months.
The drive to reinstitute street opioids coming from the
addict’s habit circuit – especially if re-exposed to the
environmental cues linked to previous opioid abuse
such as the people, places, and paraphernalia associated
with prior opioid abuse – is akin to putting oneself in
the situation where bells for Pavlov’s dogs are ringing
loud and clear. Involuntary, mindless, and powerful
habit drives then take over reflexively, bypassing
voluntary will power, no longer able to suppress
drug seeking and drug taking. This outcome results
whether the opioid addict is trying to stop methadone,
buprenorphine, or street opioids.
How can this dismal outcome be avoided? First of
all, it is important to recognize that the intensity and
duration of withdrawal from most drugs including
opioids are linked to drug half-life, with short-half-life
full agonists such as morphine or heroin producing
much more intense and short-lasting withdrawal
symptoms than either long-acting methadone, which
has a less intense but much longer duration withdrawal,
or buprenorphine, the withdrawal of which is both less
intense and shorter (Figure 13-19). Second of all, the

intensity but not the duration of withdrawal of both
methadone (Figure 13-20) and buprenorphine (Figure
13-21) can be reduced by the addition of an α2A agonist.
Both clonidine and lofexidine are α2-adrenergic agonists
that reduce signs of autonomic hyperactivity during
withdrawal and aid in the detoxification process. And
finally, in an attempt to enhance successful long-term
abstinence, opioid addicts may be transitioned not
to abstinence but to maintenance on a long-acting
injectable opioid antagonist like naltrexone. In the short
run, naltrexone shortens the withdrawal time of an α2
agonist administered either with methadone (Figure
13-20) or with buprenorphine (Figure 13-21). The
advantages of giving naltrexone long term are having
the drug present at therapeutic levels all day long, in
contrast to administering naltrexone orally (Figure 1322). Furthermore, with naltrexone monthly injections
the opioid-abstinent person now only has to make a
decision to take medication once every 30 days instead
of 30 times in 30 days. Even better, an impulsive patient
cannot readily stop his/her injectable naltrexone in order
to relapse.
Agonist substitution treatments like methadone
or buprenorphine – often called medication-assisted
therapy (MAT) – are most successful in the setting
of a structured maintenance treatment program that
includes random urine drug screening and intensive

Comparative Severity and Duration
of Opioid Withdrawal

Severity of Withdrawal

morphine

Figure 13-19 Comparative severity
and duration of opioid withdrawal.
Following abrupt discontinuation,
the time to onset of peak withdrawal
symptoms and the duration of
symptoms are dependent on the
half-life of the drug involved. With
morphine (and heroin) withdrawal,
symptoms peak within 36–72 hours
and last for 7–10 days. With methadone
withdrawal, symptoms are less
severe and peak at 72–96 hours, but
can last for 14 days or more. With
buprenorphine withdrawal, symptoms
peak after a few days and are less
severe than with morphine/heroin;
the duration of symptoms is similar to
morphine/heroin.

methadone

buprenorphine

0

5

10

13

15

Days since opioid

561




<<<PAGE 578>>>

STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Severity of Withdrawal

Severity and Duration of Withdrawal
After Methadone Discontinuation

abrupt
discontinuation
of methadone

Figure 13-20 Severity and duration
of withdrawal after methadone
discontinuation. With abrupt
discontinuation of methadone,
withdrawal symptoms peak at 72–96
hours but can last for 14 days or more.
The intensity, but not the duration,
of withdrawal symptoms can be
reduced by adding an α2-adrenergic
agonist such as lofexidine or clonidine.
Specifically, these agents can relieve
autonomic symptoms. Adding both an
α2-adrenergic agonist and a μ-opioid
receptor antagonist such as naltrexone
can reduce the severity as well as the
duration of withdrawal symptoms.

lofexidine alone

lofexidine+
naltrexone
0

5

10

15

Days since last methadone dose

Severity of Withdrawal

Severity and Duration of Withdrawal
After Buprenorphine Discontinuation

abrupt discontinuation
of buprenorphine

Figure 13-21 Severity and duration
of withdrawal after buprenorphine
discontinuation. With abrupt
discontinuation of buprenorphine,
withdrawal symptoms peak at around
72 hours and last for about a week.
The intensity, but not the duration,
of withdrawal symptoms can be
reduced by adding an α2-adrenergic
agonist such as lofexidine or clonidine.
Specifically, these agents can relieve
autonomic symptoms. Adding both an
α2-adrenergic agonist and a μ-opioid
receptor antagonist such as naltrexone
can reduce the severity as well as the
duration of withdrawal symptoms.

lofexidine alone

lofexidine+
naltrexone
0

3

5

7

Days since last buprenorphine dose

psychological, medical, and vocational services. The
same is true for those on long-acting naltrexone
injections. Unfortunately, only a minority of opioid
addicts enter treatment, only a minority of those in
treatment receive MAT, and almost none of them
562

receive injectable naltrexone. Whether this is because of
philosophical differences of various treatment facilities,
economic incentives, or therapeutic nihilism is unknown
but it seems that the currently available best treatments
are insufficiently prescribed.




<<<PAGE 579>>>

Chapter 13: Impulsivity, Compulsivity, and Addiction

Figure 13-22 Naltrexone formulations.
The μ-opioid receptor antagonist
naltrexone is available in both an oral
formulation and as a once-monthly
intramuscular (IM) injection. With
oral naltrexone, one experiences
fluctuating, dose-dependent plasma
concentrations. In addition, one must
decide daily whether or not to continue
treatment. With the monthly injection,
one experiences increased and
consistent plasma concentrations and
only has to make the decision to take
medication once every 30 days.

Naltrexone Mean Plasma Levels (ng/mL)

Naltrexone: Oral vs. Long-Acting Injectable
30
naltrexone 380 mg
IM injection

25

oral naltrexone 50 mg

20
15
10
5
0

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

Time (Days)

Cannabis

You can indeed get stoned without inhaling (see
endocannabinoids released in Figure 13-5)! The brain
makes its own cannabis-like neurotransmitters –
anandamide and 2-arachidonoylglycerol (2-AG)
(Figures 13-23 and 13-24). So does the body. These
neurotransmitters and their receptors cannabinoid 1
and 2 (CB1 and CB2) make up the “endocannabinoid”
system – the endogenous cannabinoid system (Figure
13-23). In the brain, release of classic neurotransmitters
can stimulate the synthesis of endocannabinoids from
precursors stored in postsynaptic lipid membranes
(Figure 13-24A). Upon release of these endocannabinoids
into the synapse, they travel retrograde to presynaptic
CB1 receptors and “talk back” to the presynaptic
neuron where they can inhibit the release of the
classic neurotransmitter (Figure 13-24B). Retrograde
neurotransmission was introduced in Chapter 1 and
illustrated in Figure 1-5. Both CB1 receptors and CB2
receptors are localized in brain, with CB1 receptors
present in greater density. Both receptors bind both
endocannabinoids, 2-AG with high efficacy and
anandamide with low efficacy (Figure 13-23). CB2
receptors are also in the periphery, mostly on immune
cells, and also bind the same two endocannabinoids
(Figure 13-23).
Cannabis is a mixture of hundreds of chemicals and
over 100 alkaloid cannabinoids. The most important of
these are tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and cannabidiol
(CBD) (Figure 13-25). THC interacts with CB1 and
CB2 receptors and has psychoactive properties. CBD
is an isomer of THC and relatively inactive at CB1

and CB2 receptors (Figure 13-25). CBD does not have
psychoactive properties and its mechanism of action
is really unknown (Figure 13-25). Cannabis comes
in various mixtures of THC and CBD (Figure 13-26).
Higher CBD content has a lower risk of hallucinations,
delusions, and memory impairment (Figure 13-26).
Pure CBD might even be antipsychotic and anxiolytic
(Figure 13-26). Over time, cannabis has become more
potent in terms of more THC and less CBD, with
resultant higher risk of hallucinations, delusions,
anxiety, and memory impairment (Figure 13-26). It
is not currently possible to identify in advance those
vulnerable to psychosis or to the precipitation of
schizophrenia by cannabis. Nevertheless, an influential
recent study concluded that if nobody smoked highpotency cannabis, 12% of all cases of first-episode
psychosis across Europe would be prevented, rising to
32% in London and 50% in Amsterdam. Cannabis can
also exacerbate psychosis in patients who already have a
psychotic illness.
In usual intoxicating doses for most persons
without risk for psychosis, cannabis produces a sense
of well-being, relaxation, a sense of friendliness, a
loss of temporal awareness, including confusing the
past with the present, slowing of thought processes,
impairment of short-term memory, and a feeling of
achieving special insights. At high doses, cannabis
can induce panic, toxic delirium as well as psychosis,
especially in the vulnerable. One complication of longterm cannabis use is the “amotivational syndrome” in
frequent users. This syndrome is seen predominantly
in heavy daily cannabis users and is characterized
563

13




<<<PAGE 588>>>

STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Maladaptations of the Reward Pathway Can Shift
Behavior from Normal to Impulsive to Compulsive
Normal

Impulsivity

Compulsivity

Salient Stimulus

Salient Stimulus

Stimulus

Favorable
Outcome

Outcome

Pleasurable Reward

Pleasurable Reward

Knowing &
Anticipating

Binge

“Liking”

“Wanting”

Absence

Opioids

Dopamine

Learning

Pleasurable Reward

Habits

Anticipation

Figure 13-29A Maladaptations of the reward pathway. Left: Under normal conditions, if a salient stimulus causes a favorable outcome
this behavior will be encoded as a pleasurable reward. The learning of this pleasurable reward is called “liking” and is an opioiddependent process. The knowledge and anticipation of this pleasurable reward is called “wanting” and is a dopamine-dependent
process. Center: An increase in “wanting” is thought to underlie impulsivity, such that the drive for the pleasurable reward outweighs the
outcome and the behavior is repeated without forethought. Repetition of the impulsive behavior doesn’t happen all the time, and the
absence of the behavior can lead to a stronger desire, or anticipation, for the reward. It is this cycle of binge–abstinence–anticipation that
can lead to compulsivity. Right: When a behavior becomes compulsive, the reward no longer matters and the behavior is strictly driven
by the stimulus. It is through this mechanism that habits develop.

Reversing Habit Learning and the Potential of
Long-Acting Injectable Naltrexone
Normal

Impulsivity

Compulsivity

Salient Stimulus

Salient Stimulus

Stimulus

Favorable
Outcome

Outcome

Pleasurable Reward

Pleasurable Reward

Knowing &
Anticipating

Binge

“Liking”

“Wanting”

Absence

Opioids

Dopamine

Learning

Administration of the long-acting
injectable naltrexone may in fact
enhance this process of habit extinction

Habits

Anticipation

Figure 13-29B Reversing habit learning. Since drug abuse is a form of learned behavior, it is theoretically possible to induce
pharmacological extinction. In the case of alcohol or opioid dependence, this can theoretically be achieved by administering a μ-opioid
antagonist at the same time that alcohol or opioid use occurs (rather than during abstinence). This prevents any enjoyment or euphoria
associated with taking the substance. If this approach is successful short term and repeated over and again, it begins the process of
extinction or habit reversal. Eventually, the conditioned response of consuming alcohol or taking an opioid in response to conditioned
stimuli (withdrawal and environmental cues) becomes extinguished. Theoretically, the brain is “relearning” to disassociate alcohol or
opioid use from past triggers and control returns to circuits of voluntary actions and away from involuntary habit circuits.

572




<<<PAGE 589>>>

Chapter 13: Impulsivity, Compulsivity, and Addiction

especially when you are learning. Similarly, the nature of
recovery is to relapse, and indeed maybe seven times or
more before becoming truly abstinent. The novel concept
explained here takes advantage of this inevitability of
multiple relapses to reverse the habit circuit by learning
that relapse is no longer rewarding.
Drink Your Way to Sobriety

This idea uses the brain’s own mechanisms of
neuroplasticity, learning, and migration of control
in the impulsive–compulsive circuitry to induce
pharmacological extinction. Since drug abuse is a form
of learned behavior, patients with alcoholism experience
enhanced reinforcement (via the opioid system) when
they drink (discussed above and illustrated in Figures 1315 and 13-16 ). Contrary to earlier beliefs, detoxification
and alcohol deprivation do not stop alcohol craving, but
instead increase subsequent alcohol drinking. Recovered
alcoholics will often mention that many years following
their last drink they still get a burst of craving just driving
past their favorite bar, a vestige of their incompletely
extinguished alcohol habit.
So, the idea is to give alcohol to an active alcoholic
and have the patient experience the lack of enjoyment,
the lack of euphoria, and the loss of craving that drinking
normally produces and that heavy drinking in particular
produces. The program involves taking an oral opioid
antagonist (e.g., naltrexone or nalmefene) approximately
1 hour prior to consuming alcohol. When the alcohol
no longer produces the desired effects because of the
opioid antagonist, the alcohol is no longer reinforcing.
If this approach is successful short term, and repeated
over and again, it begins the process of extinction. The
patient slowly learns that they cannot “drink over” their
opioid antagonist and drinking is no longer rewarding.
Or at least the reward is greatly blunted and the habit of
alcohol consumption eventually becomes at least partially
extinguished, making eventual abstinence easier to attain,
at least in theory. Blocking the reinforcing properties
of alcohol weakens the mindless automatic responses
to cues in the environment to drink. The theory goes
that if drinking is not reinforcing, drinking will abate.
Rather like the conditioned Pavlovian dog whose mouth
waters at the sound of the bell, but when food is no longer
associated with the bell, sooner or later the involuntary
mouth-watering is extinguished and the bell now causes
no mouth-watering.
Sometimes called the Sinclair method and
championed at first in Scandinavia, this therapeutic
intervention for alcoholism has been tested in many

clinical studies with good reported success. Interesting
here is the observation that opioid antagonists are
particularly effective when paired with drinking, but
relatively ineffective when given during abstinence.
This fits with the notion that to reverse the “habit” of
drinking, extinction learning must take place where the
reward of abusing alcohol is unpaired with taking alcohol
(Figure 13-29B). This can also be done when attempting
(and failing) to “drink over” a long-acting injection of
naltrexone. Unfortunately, very little opioid antagonist
therapy is prescribed for alcohol use disorder. One reason
for this might be that opioid antagonist treatment is most
effective in reducing heavy drinking, and not necessarily
as effective in promoting complete abstinence.
Inject Your Way to Heroin Abstinence

Scandinavian and other investigators have also noted
that individuals with opioid use disorder act similarly
to those with alcohol use disorder in response to opioid
antagonist treatment. That is, individuals dependent
on opioids who attempt to “inject over” long-acting
naltrexone with an illicit street opioid find that the opioid
is no longer reinforcing. The more times one tries but
fails to get high, the faster they develop extinction of their
habit, learning that injections are associated with reward
(Figure 13-29B). The learned behavior of reinforcement
from opioids is now slowly reversed as the act of injecting
an opioid is not rewarding. Eventually, the conditioned
response of taking an opioid in response to conditioned
stimuli (withdrawal and environmental cues) becomes
extinguished (Figure 13-29B). Theoretically, the brain is
“relearning” to disassociate opioid use from past triggers
and control returns to circuits of voluntary actions and
away from involuntary habit circuits. Unfortunately, very
little opioid antagonist treatment is prescribed for opioid
addicts.
Smoke Your Way to Quitting

This same phenomenon of “cheating” assisting the
development of abstinence due to behavioral and
pharmacological extinction has been seen in smoking
cessation treatment as well. Many smokers who take
treatments to stop smoking nevertheless simultaneously
smoke. Thus, such patients “smoke over” their nicotine
patch or bupropion and are able to quell craving and
allow their habit to perpetuate in the face of treatment.
However, with the nicotinic partial agonist varenicline,
they cannot “smoke over” this treatment since it has
higher affinity for nicotinic receptors than nicotine itself
and the result is a lack of reinforcement from the cheating
573

13




<<<PAGE 625>>>

Suggested Reading and Selected References

Koob GF, Le Moal M (2008) Addiction and the brain
antireward system. Ann Rev Psychol 59: 29–53.
Koob GF, Volkow ND (2010) Neurocircuitry of addiction.
Neuropsychopharmacology 35: 217–38.
Mandyam CD, Koob GF (2012) The addicted brain craves
new neurons: putative role for adult-born progenitors in
promoting recovery. Trends Neurosci 35: 250–60.
Nestler EJ (2005) Is there a common molecular pathway for
addiction? Nat Neurosci 11: 1445–9.
Nutt DJ, Hughes AL, Erritzoe D, et al. (2015) The dopamine
theory of addiction: 40 years of highs and lows. Nat Rev
Neurosci 16: 305–22.
Schneider S, Peters J, Bromberg U, et al. (2012) Risk taking
and the adolescent reward system: a potential common
link to substance abuse. Am J Psychiatry 169: 39–46.
Solway A, Gu X, Montague PR (2017) Forgetting to be
addicted: reconsolidation and the disconnection of things
past. Biol Psychiatry 82: 774–5

DeWitte P, Littleton J, Parot P, Koob G (2005) Neuroprotective
and abstinence-promoting effects of acamprosate.
Elucidating the mechanism of action. CNS Drugs 6:
517–37.
Garbutt JC, Kranzler HR, O’Malley SS, et al. (2005) Efficacy
and tolerability of long-acting injectable naltrexone for
alcohol dependence. A randomized controlled trial. JAMA
293: 1617–25.
Kiefer F, Wiedemann K (2004) Combined therapy: what does
acamprosate and naltrexone combination tell us? Alcohol
Alcohol 39: 542–7.
Kiefer F, Jahn H, Tarnaske T, et al. (2003) Comparing and
combining naltrexone and acamprosate in relapse
prevention of alcoholism. Arch Gen Psychiatry 60: 92–9.
Mann K, Bladstrom A, Torup T, et al. (2013) Extending the
treatment options in alcohol dependence: a randomized
controlled study of as-needed nalmefene. Biol Psychiatry
73: 706–13.

Volkow ND, Wang GJ, Fowler JS, Tomasi D, Telang F (2011)
Addiction: beyond dopamine reward circuitry. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 108: 15037–42.

Martinez D, Gil R, Slifstein M, et al. (2005) Alcohol
dependence is associated with blunted dopamine
transmission in the ventral striatum. Biol Psychiatry 58:
779–86.

Substance Abuse: Alcohol

Mason BJ (2003) Acamprosate and naltrexone treatment
for alcohol dependence: an evidence-based risk-benefits
assessment. Eur Neuropsychopharmacol 13: 469–75.

Anton RF, O’Malley SS, Ciraulo DA, et al. (2006) Combined
pharmacotherapies and behavioral interventions for
alcohol dependence. The combine study: a randomized
controlled trial. JAMA 295: 2003–17.
Anton RF, Pettinati H, Zweben A, et al. (2004) A multi site
dose ranging study of nalmefene in the treatment of
alcohol dependence. J Clin Psychopharmacol 24: 421–8.
Braus DH, Schumann G, Machulla HJ, Bares R, Mann K (2005)
Correlation of stable elevations in striatal μ-opioid receptor
availability in detoxified alcoholic patients with alcohol
craving. A positron emission tomography study using carbon
11-labeled carfentanil. Arch Gen Psychiatry 62: 57–64.
Crevecoeur D, Cousins SJ, Denering L, et al. (2018)
Effectiveness of extended release naltrexone to reduce
alcohol cravings and use behaviors during treatment and at
follow-up. J Subst Abuse Treat 85: 105–8.
Dahchour A, DeWitte P (2003) Effects of acamprosate on
excitatory amino acids during multiple ethanol withdrawal
periods. Alcohol Clin Exp Res 3: 465–70.
Dakwar E, Levin F, Hart CL, et al. (2020) A single ketamine
infusion combined with motivational enhancement
therapy for alcohol use disorder: a randomized
midazolam controlled pilot study. Am J Psychiatry 172:
125–33.
DeWitte P (2004) Imbalance between neuroexcitatory and
neuroinhibitory amino acids causes craving for ethanol.
Addict Behav 29: 1325–39.

Mason BJ (2005) Acamprosate in the treatment of alcohol
dependence. Expert Opin Pharmacother 6: 2103–15.
Mason BJ, Goodman AM, Chabac S, Lehert P (2006) Effect of
oral acamprosate on abstinence in patients with alcohol
dependence in a double-blind, placebo-controlled trial: the
role of patient motivation. J Psychiatr Res 40: 382–92.
Netzeband JG, Gruol DL (1995) Modulatory effects of acute
ethanol on metabotropic glutamate responses in cultured
Purkinje neurons. Brain Res 688: 105–13.
O’Brien CO (2015) In treating alcohol use disorders, why
not use evidence-based treatment? Am J Psychiatry 172:
305–7.
Palpacuer C, Duprez R, Huneau A, et al. (2017)
Pharmacologically controlled drinking in the treatment
of alcohol dependence or alcohol use disorders: a
systematic review with direct and network meta analyses
on nalmefene, naltrexone, acamprosate, baclofen and
topiramate. Addiction 113: 220–37.
Petrakis IL, Poling J, Levinson C (2005) Naltrexone and
disulfiram in patients with alcohol dependence and
comorbid psychiatric disorders. Biol Psychiatry 57:
1128–37.
Pettinati HM, O’Brien CP, Rabinowitz AR (2006) The status
of naltrexone in the treatment of alcohol dependence.
Specific effects on heavy drinking. J Clin Psychopharmacol
26: 610–25.
609




<<<PAGE 626>>>

Suggested Reading and Selected References

Roozen HG, de Waart R, van der Windt DAW, et al. (2005) A
systematic review of the effectiveness of naltrexone in the
maintenance treatment of opioid and alcohol dependence.
Eur Neuropsychopharmacol 16: 311–23.
Smith-Bernardin S, Rowe C, Behar E, et al. (2018) Low
threshold extended release naltrexone for high utilizers
of public services with severe alcohol use disorder: a pilot
study. J Subst Abuse Treat 85: 109–15.
Soyka M (2014) Nalmefene for the treatment of alcohol
dependence: a current update. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol
17: 675–84.
Van Amsterdam J, van den Brink W (2013) Reduced risk
drinking as a viable treatment goal in problematic alcohol
use and alcohol dependence. J Psychopharmacol 27:
987–97.
Wiers CE, Stelzel C, Gladwin TE, et al. (2015) Effects of
cognitive bias modification training on neural alcohol cue
reactivity in alcohol dependence. Am J Psychiatry 172:
334–43.

Substance Abuse: Cannabis
Black N, Stockings E, Campbell G, et al. (2019) Cannabinoids
for the treatment of mental disorders and symptoms of
mental disorders: a systematic review and meta analysis.
Lancet Psychiatry 6: 995–1010.
Haney M, Hill MN (2018) Cannabis and cannabinoids:
from synapse to society. Neuropsychopharm Rev 43:
1–212.
Hindley G, Beck K, Borgan B (2020) Psychiatric symptoms
caused by cannabis constituents: a systematic review and
meta-analysis. Lancet Psychiatry 7: 344–53.
Hines LA, Freeman TP, Gage SH, et al. (2020) Association of
high potency cannabis use with mental and substance use
in adolescence. JAMA Psychiatry 77: 1044–51.
Hurd YL, Spriggs S, Alishayev J, et al. (2019) Cannabidiol for
the reduction of cue-induced craving and anxiety in drug
abstinent individuals with heroin use disorder: a double
blind randomized placebo controlled trial. Am J Psychiatry
176: 911–22.
James S (2020) A Clinician’s Guide to Cannabinoid Science.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kovacs FE, Knop T, Urbanski MJ, et al. (2012) Exogenous
and endogenous cannabinoids suppress inhibitory
neurotransmission in the human neocortex.
Neuropsychopharmacology 37: 1104–14.
Mason BJ, Crean R, Goodell V, et al. (2012) A proof-of-concept
randomized controlled study of gabapentin: effects on
cannabis use, withdrawal and executive function deficits
in cannabis-dependent adults. Neuropsychopharmacology
37: 1689–98.

610

Nugent SM, Morasco BJ, O’Neil ME, et al. (2017) The effects of
cannabis among adults with chronic pain and an overview
of general harms: a systematic review. Ann Intern Med 167:
319–31.

Substance Abuse: Nicotine
Akkus F, Ametamey SM, Treyer V, et al. (2013) Market global
reduction in mGlutR5 receptor binding in smokers and
ex smokers determined by 11C-ABP688 positron emission
tomography. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 10: 737–42.
Akkus F, Treyer V, Johayem A, et al. (2016) Association of
long-term nicotine abstinence with normal metabotropic
glutamate receptor 5 binding. Biol Psychiatry 79: 474–80.
Crunelle CL, Miller ML, Booij J, van den Rink W (2010) The
nicotinic acetylcholine receptor partial agonist varenicline
and the treatment of drug dependence: a review. Eur
Neuropsychopharmacol 20: 69–79.
Culbertson CS, Bramen J, Cohen MS (2011) Effect of bupropion
treatment on brain activation induced by cigarette-related
cues in smokers. Arch Gen Psychiatry 68: 505–15.
Evins AE, Culhane MA, Alpert JE, et al. (2008) A controlled
trial of bupropion added to nicotine patch and behavioral
therapy for smoking cessation in adults with unipolar
depressive disorders. J Clin Psychopharmacol 28: 660–6.
Franklin T, Wang Z, Suh JJ, et al. (2011) Effects of varenicline
on smoking cue-triggered neural and craving responses.
Arch Gen Psychiatry 68: 516–26.
King DP, Paciga S, Pickering E, et al. (2012) Smoking
cessation pharmacogenetics: analysis of varenicline
and bupropion in placebo-controlled clinical trials.
Neuropsychopharmacology 37: 641–50.
Lotipour S, Mandelkern M, Alvarez-Estrada M, Brody AL
(2012) A single administration of low-dose varenicline
saturates α4β2* nicotinic acetylcholine receptors in the
human brain. Neuropsychopharmacology 37: 1738–48.
Steinberg MB, Greenhaus S, Schmelzer AC, et al. (2009)
Triple-combination pharmacotherapy for medically ill
smokers. A randomized trial. Ann Intern Med 150: 447–54.

Substance Abuse: Opioids
Bell J, Strang J (2020) Medication treatment of opioid use
disorder. Biol Psychiatry 87: 82–8.
Chutuape MA, Jasinski DR, Finerhood MI, Stitzer ML (2001)
One-, three-, and six-month outcomes after brief inpatient
opioid detoxification. Am J Drug Alcohol Abuse 27: 19–44.
Davids E, Gastpar M (2004) Buprenorphine in the treatment of
opioid dependence. Eur Neuropsychopharmacol 14: 209–16.
Elkader A, Sproule B (2005) Buprenorphine: clinical
pharmacokinetics in the treatment of opioid dependence.
Clin Pharmacokinet 44: 661–80.




<<<PAGE 627>>>

Suggested Reading and Selected References

Han B, Compton WM, Blanco C, et al. (2017) Prescription
opioid use, misuse and use disorders in US adults: 2015
national survey on drug use and health. Ann Intern Med
167: 293–301.
Johansson J, Hirvonen J, Lovro Z, et al. (2019) Intranasal
naloxone rapidly occupies brain mu opioid receptors
in human subjects. Neuropsychopharmacology 44:
1667–73.
Kowalczyk WJ, Phillips KA, Jobes ML, et al. (2015) Clonidine
maintenance prolongs opioid abstinence and decouples
stress from craving in daily life: a randomized controlled
trial with ecological momentary assessment. Am J
Psychiatry 172: 760–7.
Krupitsky E, Nunes EV, Ling W, et al. (2011) Injectable
extended-release naltrexone for opioid dependence: a
double-blind, placebo-controlled, multicenter randomized
trial. Lancet 377: 1506–13.
Lee JD, Nunes EV, Novo P, et al. (2018) Comparative
effectiveness of extended-release naltrexone versus
buprenorphine–naloxone for opioid relapse prevention
(X:BOT): a multicentre, open label, randomized controlled
trial. Lancet 391: 309–18.
Marquet P (2002) Pharmacology of high-dose
buprenorphine. In Buprenorphine Therapy of Opiate
Addiction, Kintz P and Marquet P (eds.), Totawa, NJ:
Humana Press, 1–11.
National Institute on Drug Abuse. Drugs, brains, and behavior.
www.drugabuse.gov/sites/default/files/soa_2014.pdf.
Accessed January 2018.

Sullivan MA, Bisage A, Bavlicova M, et al. (2019) A
randomized trial comparing extended release injectable
suspension and oral naltrexone, both combined with
behavioral therapy, for the treatment of opioid use
disorder. Am J Psychiatry 176: 129–37.
Tanum L, Solli KK, Latif ZE, et al. (2017) Effectiveness
of injectable extended-release naltrexone vs. daily
buprenorphine–naloxone for opioid dependence: a
randomized clinical noninferiority trial. JAMA Psychiatry
74: 1197–205.
Tiihonen J, Krupitsky E, Verbitskaya E, et al. (2012)
Naltrexone implant for the treatment of polydrug
dependence: a randomized controlled trial. Am J
Psychiatry 169: 531–6.
Volkow ND (2014) America’s addiction to opioids: Heroin and
prescription drug abuse. Presented at the Senate Caucus
on International Narcotics Control. https://archives.
drugabuse.gov/testimonies/2014/americas-addiction-toopioids-heroin-prescription-drug-abuse.
Volkow ND, Frieden TR, Hyde PS, Cha SS (2014) Medicationassisted therapies: tackling the opioid-overdose epidemic.
N Engl J Med 370: 2063–6.
World Health Organization (2009) Guidelines for the
Psychosocially Assisted Pharmacological Treatment of
Opioid Dependence. Geneva: World Health Organization.

Substance Abuse: Stimulants

Patel B, Koston TR (2019) Keeping up with clinical advances:
opioid use disorder. CNS Spectrums 24: 17–23.

Bauman MH, Ayestas MA Jr., Partilla JS, et al. (2012) The
designer methcathinone analogs, mephedrone and
methylone, are substrates for monoamine transporters in
brain tissue. Neuropsychopharmacology 37, 1192–203.

Saanijoki T, Tuominen L, Tuulari JJ et al. (2018) Opioid
release after high intensity interval training in
healthy human subjects. Neuropsychopharmacology 43:
246–54.

Bradberry CW (2002) Dose-dependent effect of ethanol
on extracellular dopamine in mesolimbic striatum of
awake rhesus monkeys: comparison with cocaine across
individuals. Psychopharmacology 165: 67–76.

Smyth BP, Barry J, Keenan E, Ducray K (2010) Lapse and
relapse following inpatient treatment of opiate dependence.
Ir Med J 103: 176–9.

Collins GT, Narasimhan D, Cunningham AR, et al. (2012)
Long-lasting effects of a PEGylated mutant cocaine esterase
(CocE) on the reinforcing and discriminative stimulus
effects of cocaine in rats. Neuropsychopharmacology 37:
1092–103.

Spagnolo PA, Kimes A, Schwandt ML, et al. (2019)
Striatal dopamine release in response to morphine: a
11C-raclopride positron emission tomography study in
healthy men. Biol Psychiatry 86: 356–64.
Stahl SM (2018) Antagonist treatment is just as effective as
replacement therapy for opioid addition but neither is used
often enough. CNS Spectrums 23: 113–16.
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration.
Key substance use and mental health indicators in the
United States: results from the 2016 National Survey
on Drug Use and Health. www.samhsa.gov/data/sites/
default/files/NSDUH-FFR1-2016/NSDUH-FFR1-2016.
htm#opioid1. Accessed January 2018.

Dakwar E, Nunes EV, Hart CL, et al. (2019) A single ketamine
infusion combined with mindfulness based behavioral
modification to treat cocaine dependence: a randomized
clinical trial. Am J Psychiatry 176: 923–30.
Ersche KD, Bullmore ET, Craig KJ, et al. (2010) Influence of
compulsivity of drug abuse on dopaminergic modulation
of attentional bias in stimulant dependence. Arch Gen
Psychiatry 67: 632–44.
Ersche KD, Jones PS, Williams GB, et al. (2012) Abnormal
brain structure implicated in stimulant drug addiction.
Science 335: 601–4.
611


