<<<PAGE 309>>>

Chapter 7: Treatments for Mood Disorders

If blockade of SERT explains the shared clinical and
pharmacological actions of SSRIs, what explains their
differences? Although there is no generally accepted
explanation that accounts for the commonly observed
clinical phenomena of different efficacy and tolerability
of various SSRIs in individual patients, it makes sense to
consider those unique pharmacological characteristics
of the six SSRIs that are not shared with each other as
candidates to explain the broad range of individual
patient reactions to different SSRIs (Figures 7-16 through
7-21). Each SSRI has secondary pharmacological actions
other than SERT blockade, and no two SSRIs have
identical secondary pharmacological characteristics.
Whether these secondary binding profiles can account for
the differences in efficacy and tolerability in individual
patients remains to be proven. However, it does lead to
provocative hypothesis generation and gives a rational
basis for psychopharmacologists trying more than one of
these agents rather than thinking “they are all the same.”
Sometimes only an empiric trial of different SSRIs will
lead to the best match of drug to an individual patient.
Fluoxetine: An SSRI with 5HT2C Antagonist Properties

In addition to serotonin reuptake inhibition, fluoxetine
also has 5HT2C antagonist actions that may explain
many of its unique clinical properties (Figure 7-16).
5HT2C antagonism may contribute to its antidepressant
actions and also to its efficacy in other disorders,
especially in eating disorders. Other drugs for unipolar

fluoxetine
5HT2C

NET

SERT
SERT

Figure 7-16 Fluoxetine. In addition to serotonin reuptake
inhibition, fluoxetine has norepinephrine reuptake inhibition
(NRI) and serotonin 2C antagonist actions (5HT2C). 5HT2C
antagonism can lead to disinhibition of norepinephrine and
dopamine; this action may be responsible for fluoxetine’s
activating effects. NRI may be clinically relevant only at very high
doses.

depression with 5HT2C antagonist properties include
trazodone, mirtazapine, agomelatine, and some tricyclic
antidepressants, and these will be described below.
Finally, two serotonin 2A/dopamine 2 antagonists,
quetiapine (Figure 5-45) and olanzapine (Figure 5-44),
also have potent 5HT2C antagonist properties. Both
agents are used to treat psychosis (see Chapter 5) but are
also approved for augmenting other drugs for unipolar
depression, treatment-resistant unipolar depression,
and bipolar depression. Blocking serotonin action at
5HT2C receptors disinhibits (i.e., enhances) release of
both norepinephrine and dopamine, actions theoretically
beneficial for the treatment of depression (see Chapter
6 and Figure 6-24B and also the discussion below on
agomelatine).
The good news about 5HT2C antagonism may be
that it is generally activating, and the reason why
many patients, even from the first dose, detect an
energizing and fatigue-reducing effect of fluoxetine, with
improvement in concentration and attention as well. This
mechanism is perhaps best matched to depressed patients
with reduced positive affect (Figure 6-41), hypersomnia,
psychomotor retardation, apathy, and fatigue. Fluoxetine
is also approved in some countries in combination with
olanzapine for treatment-resistant unipolar depression
and for bipolar depression. Since olanzapine also has
5HT2C antagonist actions (Figure 5-44), it may be that
adding the 5HT2C antagonist actions of olanzapine to
those of fluoxetine could theoretically lead to further
enhanced dopamine and norepinephrine release in
the cortex to mediate the antidepressant actions of this
combination. 5HT2C antagonism may also contribute
to the anti-bulimia effect of higher doses of fluoxetine,
the only SSRI approved for the treatment of this eating
disorder. The bad news could be that 5HT2C antagonist
actions of fluoxetine may contribute to this agent being
sometimes less well matched to patients with agitation,
insomnia, and anxiety, who may experience unwanted
activation and even a panic attack if given an agent that
further activates them.
Fluoxetine also has weak norepinephrine reuptake
blocking properties (Figure 7-16), which may become
clinically relevant at very high doses. Fluoxetine has
a long half-life (2–3 days), and its active metabolite
an even longer half-life (2 weeks). The long halflife is advantageous in that it seems to reduce the
withdrawal reactions that are characteristic of sudden
discontinuation of some SSRIs, but it also means that
it takes a long time to clear the drug and its active

293

7




<<<PAGE 327>>>

Chapter 7: Treatments for Mood Disorders

also those localized in the gastrointestinal tract itself,
where they mediate nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea/
bowel motility when stimulated by serotonin, including
when stimulated by serotonin that is a side effect of
peripherally increased serotonin by SSRIs/SNRIs.
Blocking these 5HT3 receptors can therefore protect
against chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting
as well as against serotonin-induced gastrointestinal
side effects that can accompany agents that increase
serotonin.
More important to the mechanism of action of central
5HT3 antagonists such as mirtazapine and vortioxetine
in the treatment of unipolar depression are the 5HT3
receptors in the brain that regulate the release of
various neurotransmitters downstream in some brain
circuits that mediate the symptoms of depression. 5HT3
receptors in the brain are usually localized on GABA
(γ-aminobutyric acid) interneurons, and they are always
excitatory. This means that when serotonin stimulates a
5HT3 receptor, it causes GABA to inhibit whatever neuron
is downstream from it. This was shown for 5HT3–GABA
interactions at glutamate neurons (Figure 4-49) and
at acetylcholine and norepinephrine neurons (Figure
4-48). 5HT3 antagonism is a powerful disinhibitor of
glutamate release (Figure 7-42) and of acetylcholine and
norepinephrine (Figure 7-43), actions that theoretically
release neurotransmitters downstream to have
antidepressant action.
Serotonin Antagonist/Reuptake Inhibitors (SARIs)

The prototype drug that blocks serotonin 2A and 2C
receptors as well as serotonin reuptake is trazodone,
classified as a serotonin antagonist/reuptake inhibitor
(SARI) (Figure 7-44). Nefazodone is another SARI with
robust 5HT2A antagonist actions and weaker 5HT2C
antagonism and SERT inhibition, but is no longer
commonly used because of rare liver toxicity (Figure
7-44). Trazodone is a very interesting agent, since it acts
like two different drugs, depending upon the dose and
the formulation. We discussed a very similar situation in
Chapter 5 for quetiapine (Figure 5-46).
A more complete picture of trazodone’s binding
properties has emerged from recent studies (Figures 7-44
and 7-45) and reflects that it is a serotonin antagonist
not just at 5HT2A and 5HT2C receptors, but also at 5HT1D,
5HT2B, and 5HT7 receptors. In addition, trazodone has
potent antagonist properties at α1B, α1A, α2C, and α2B
receptors, H1 histamine receptors, and agonist actions at
5HT1A receptors (Figure 7-45). Because of these various
pharmacological actions occur with varying potencies,

it means that trazodone will act predominantly via its
highest-affinity receptor interactions at low doses, and
will recruit its lower-affinity receptor actions at higher
doses.
Different Drug at Different Doses and at Different
Delivery Rates?

Trazodone is famous for its effectiveness and utility at
low doses as a hypnotic (Figure 7-46). That is, doses of
trazodone lower than those effective for antidepressant
action are quite frequently used for insomnia. Hypnotic
doses engage the receptors for which trazodone has
the highest affinity and, amongst these, blockade is
hypothetically linked to hypnotic actions (i.e., 5HT2A,
α1 subtypes, and H1). Blocking 5HT2A receptors
enhances slow-wave sleep, and blocking α1 subtypes
and H1 receptors interferes with monoamine arousal
mechanisms (discussed in Chapter 5 and illustrated in
Figures 5-13 and 5-14). The best way to deliver a hypnotic
is with a standard oral formulation that is immediate in
onset, peaks quickly, and is out of the system by morning.
Since insomnia is one of the most frequent residual
symptoms of depression after treatment with an SSRI/
SNRI (discussed earlier in this chapter and illustrated in
Figure 7-5), addition of a hypnotic is often necessary in
treating patients with a major depressive episode. Not
only can addition of a hypnotic potentially relieve the
insomnia itself, it may also increase remission rates due
to improvement of other symptoms such as loss of energy
and depressed mood (Figure 7-5). Thus, the ability of low
doses of trazodone to improve sleep in depressed patients
has led to its popular use at low doses as an augmenting
option for residual insomnia that persists after treatment
with SSRIs/SNRIs.
The original oral formulation of trazodone used for
depression was short in duration, required multiple daily
doses higher than hypnotic doses (Figure 7-47), and was
associated with peak dose sedation after daytime doses,
not an ideal profile for a drug for unipolar depression.
Although trazodone’s antidepressant actions at higher
doses are undisputed as well as its lack of causing sexual
dysfunction or weight gain, the presence of daytime
sedation makes using trazodone at antidepressant doses
in the standard oral formulation difficult in clinical
practice. However, a once-daily controlled-release
formulation with higher doses of trazodone is available
for use in depression, which blunts peak plasma drug
levels to reduce daytime sedation. These higher doses
recruit additional known antidepressant receptor actions,
including serotonin reuptake inhibition (Figures 7-10
311

7




<<<PAGE 330>>>

STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

α
1

α
2

α
1

T
5H
1A

5H

T

H
1

T2

A

5HT1D

NE

SERT

trazodone
mianserin

SERT

mianserin
nefazodone
2A

2B

5HT

5HT

C

T2

T2

5HT7

5H

C

5H

Figure 7-44 Serotonin antagonist/reuptake inhibitors (SARIs). Shown here are icons for two serotonin antagonist/reuptake inhibitors
(SARIs): trazodone and nefazodone. These agents have a dual action, but the two mechanisms are different from the dual action of
the serotonin–norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs). The SARIs act by potent blockade of serotonin 2A (5HT2A) receptors as well
as dose-dependent blockade of serotonin 2C (5HT2C) receptors and the serotonin transporter (SERT). SARIs also block α1-adrenergic
receptors. Trazodone has the unique properties of histamine 1 (H1) receptor antagonism and antagonism at multiple additional
serotonin receptors.

target affinity Ki (nM)

1000

higher affinity

lower affinity

800
600
400
200

e)

1
on
-s

ch

sig

m

a

(n

aN

tiv

D

2
D

T1
B

el
ec

ne
an

5H

t)
ra

3

l(

D

2B
ph

a

T7
al

5H

RT

2C

T2
C
5H

SE

H

1

al
ph
a

1A

B

T1
A

a
ph
al

5H

5H
T2

T1
D

1B

5H

al
ph
a

5H

T2
A

0

Figure 7-45 Trazodone affinity for different receptors. Trazodone has binding affinity for numerous receptor subtypes, but the potency
varies. Thus, at low doses, trazodone may act predominantly via its highest-affinity receptor actions, with other properties becoming
relevant only at higher doses.

through 7-15) and antagonist action at 5HT1D, 5HT2C,
5HT7, and α2 receptors, as well as 5HT1A agonist actions.
The bottom line is that there are numerous potential
mechanisms to cause monoamine neurotransmitter
release and antidepressant actions at higher doses.
Furthermore, with first-dose hypnotic actions, trazodone
can exert its antidepressant actions with rapid onset and
enhanced tolerability for some side effects compared
to SSRIs/SNRIs. That is, SSRIs/SNRIs raise serotonin
314

levels to act at all serotonin receptors, stimulating 5HT1A
receptors for therapeutic actions while concomitantly
stimulating 5HT2A receptors and 5HT2C receptors that
theoretically cause the side effects of SSRIs including
sexual dysfunction, insomnia, and activation/anxiety
(Figure 7-48A). However, trazodone blocks the actions of
serotonin at 5HT2A and 5HT2C receptors, accounting for
its profile of lack of sexual dysfunction and reduction of
anxiety and insomnia.




<<<PAGE 331>>>

Chapter 7: Treatments for Mood Disorders

Trazodone for Depression:
Serotonin Antagonist/
Reuptake Inhibitor (SARI)
α
1

Trazodone for Insomnia:
Multifunctional Neurotransmitter
Antagonist

α
2

A
T1
5H

5H

α1

H
1

T2

A

5HT1D

trazodone
mianserin

H1

SERT

5HT2A

B
HT2

5HT7

5H

T2
C

5

Figure 7-46 Trazodone at different doses. (Left)
High doses that recruit saturation of the
serotonin transporter (i.e., 150–600 mg) are
required for trazodone to have therapeutic
actions in depression. At this high dose,
trazodone is a multifunctional serotonergic
agent with antagonist actions at 5HT2A and
5HT2C receptors as well as additional serotonin
receptors. Trazodone is also an α1 and histamine
1 (H1) antagonist at these doses. (Right) At lower
doses of trazodone (i.e., 25–150 mg), it does
not saturate the serotonin transporter; it does,
however, retain antagonist actions at 5HT2A, α1,
and H1 receptors, with corresponding efficacy for
insomnia.

dose for depression
(150-600 mg)

dose for insomnia
(25-150 mg)

Figure 7-47 Trazodone IR versus XR
given once nightly. Shown here are
steady-state estimates of the plasma
trazodone levels from the hypnotic dosing
of 50, 75, or 100 mg once nightly of
trazodone immediate release (IR). Peak
drug concentrations are reached rapidly
with a similarly rapid fall off overnight.
The minimum levels estimated for
antidepressant actions of trazodone are
reached transiently, if at all, by hypnotic
dosing. By contrast, 300 mg of trazodone
extended release (XR) given once
nightly generates plasma levels that rise
slowly and never fall below minimum
antidepressant concentrations. Peak levels
of trazodone XR at 300 mg are about the
same as the peak levels of trazodone IR
at 100 mg.

Trazodone IR vs. XR Given Once Nightly
2.2
2
1.8
1.6
1.4

300 mg XR qhs

mg/L

1.2
1

100 mg IR qhs

minimum
antidepressant
concentration

0.8
0.65
0.5
0.3

75 mg IR qhs
50 mg IR qhs

0.1
0
23:30

4:00

8:00

12:00

16:00

20:00

23:30

hours

Vortioxetine

Vortioxetine is a drug approved for treating unipolar
depression and which causes SERT inhibition as well as
having antagonist actions at 5HT3 and 5HT7 receptors,
with agonist actions at 5HT1A receptors and weak
partial agonist to antagonist actions at 5HT1B/D receptors
(Figure 7-49). This unique blend of pharmacological
actions leads to downstream release of many different
neurotransmitters as will be explained here, and these
actions hypothetically lead to antidepressant effects
in unipolar depression, characterized by robust pro-

cognitive actions, especially improving processing speed.
The importance of cognitive symptoms in unipolar
depression is discussed in Chapter 6 as the possible
clinical consequence of loss of neurotrophic factors,
synapses, and neurons (Figures 6-27 through 6-31).
What is cognitive processing speed and what could
be the mechanism by which vortioxetine improves this
more than other antidepressants? “Cognition” is not a
single, simple brain function and “cognitive dysfunction”
is not a single, simple symptom. Cognitive impairment
that can be measured as part of the symptom profile
315

7




<<<PAGE 393>>>

Chapter 8: Anxiety, Trauma, and Treatment

briefly in Chapter 7 and illustrated in Figures 7-87 and
7-88. Ketamine is more extensively discussed in Chapter
7 as well. Future research is trying to determine how
to use psychotherapy to provoke emotional memories
and reactivate them by producing a state where a
pharmacological agent such as a hallucinogen producing
a dissociative state, including ketamine as well as
psilocybin or MDMA, could be administered to disrupt
reconsolidation of these emotional memories and thereby
relieve symptoms of anxiety, trauma, re-experiencing
and other emotional memories of PTSD and anxiety
disorders, and existential distress in terminally ill patients.
These are early days in terms of applying this concept
in clinical settings, but this notion supports the growing
idea that psychotherapy and psychopharmacology can be
synergistic. Much more needs to be learned as to how to
exploit this theoretical synergy.

TREATMENTS FOR ANXIETY
DISORDER SUBTYPES
Generalized Anxiety Disorder

Psychopharmacological treatments for generalized
anxiety disorder overlap greatly with those for
other anxiety disorders and depression and include
SSRIs, SNRIs, benzodiazepines, buspirone, and α2δ
ligands such as pregabalin and gabapentin. While
benzodiazepines should not be prescribed to a patient
with generalized anxiety disorder who is abusing other
substances, particularly alcohol, benzodiazepines can
be useful in patients who are not substance abusers
for short terms when initiating an SSRI or SNRI, since
these serotonergic agents are often activating, difficult
to tolerate early in dosing, and have a delayed onset
of action. In other patients, benzodiazepines can be
useful to “top up” an SSRI or SNRI for patients who
have experienced only partial relief of symptoms and
have stabilized on SSRI/SNRI therapy. Benzodiazepines
can also be useful for occasional intermittent use when
symptoms surge and sudden relief is needed. Alpha-2delta ligands are a good alternative to benzodiazepines
in some patients. These ligands are approved for the
treatment of anxiety in Europe and other countries
but not in the US, yet can be useful “off-label” as
augmenting agents.
Other “off-label” treatments for anxiety can
include mirtazapine, trazodone, vilazodone, tricyclic
antidepressants, or even sedating antihistamines such as
hydroxyzine.

Panic Disorder

Panic attacks occur in many conditions, not just panic
disorder, and panic disorder is frequently comorbid with
the other anxiety disorders and with major depression.
It is thus not surprising that contemporary treatments
for panic disorder overlap significantly with those for
the other anxiety disorders and with those for major
depression. Treatments include SSRIs and SNRIs, as
well as benzodiazepines, and α2δ ligands. “Off-label”
treatments of panic attacks in anxiety disorders can also
include mirtazapine and trazodone. The monoamine
oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs), discussed in Chapter 7, are
much neglected in psychopharmacology in general and
for the treatment of treatment-resistant panic disorder in
particular. However, MAOIs can have powerful efficacy
in panic and should be considered when other agents
fail. Cognitive behavioral psychotherapy is both an
alternative or an augmentation to psychopharmacological
approaches, and can help modify cognitive distortions,
and, through exposure, diminish phobic avoidance
behaviors.
Social Anxiety Disorder

The treatment options for this anxiety disorder are
very similar to those for panic disorder with a few
noteworthy differences. The SSRIs and SNRIs and α2δ
ligands are certainly useful treatments, but the utility
of benzodiazepine is not as widely accepted as it might
be for generalized anxiety disorder and panic disorder.
There is also less evidence for the utility of older drugs for
depression for use in social anxiety disorder. Beta blockers,
sometimes with benzodiazepines, can be useful for some
patients with very discrete types of social anxiety, such
as performance anxiety. One drug that is (unfortunately)
quite effective but obviously should not be used is alcohol
for the treatment of social anxiety symptoms. Many
patients of course are aware of this and abuse alcohol
before they seek safer and more effective treatment.
Cognitive behavioral psychotherapy can be a powerful
intervention, sometimes better than drugs for certain
patients, and often helpful in combination with drugs.
PTSD

Although some treatments such as certain SSRIs are
approved for PTSD, psychopharmacological treatments
for PTSD are not as effective as these same treatments are
in anxiety disorders. Also, PTSD is so highly comorbid
that many of the psychopharmacological treatments
are more effectively aimed at comorbidities such as

377

8




<<<PAGE 440>>>

STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Figure 10-34 Z drugs: GABAA positive
allosteric modulators (PAMs). Several
Z drugs are shown here. These include
racemic zopiclone (not available
in the United States), eszopiclone,
zaleplon, zolpidem, and zolpidem CR.
Zaleplon, zolpidem, and zolpidem
CR are selective for GABAA receptors
that contain the α1 subunit; however,
it does not appear that zopiclone or
eszopiclone have this same selectivity.

GABA A PAMs - “Z Drugs”

12
9

12
9

3
6

α1

12
9

3

α5

α1

α3

α2

6

α5
α2

α1

α3

R,S-zopiclone
(Stilnox - not in US)

α5
α3

α2

eszopiclone
(Lunesta)

12
9

12
9

3
6

12
3

9

6

α1

3
6

α1

α1

zaleplon
(Sonata)

zolpidem
(Ambien)

zolpidem CR
(Ambien CR)
OX1

OX1

R

R

suvorexant

lemborexant

OX2R

OX2R

Other DORAs (such as daridorexant) and also selective
orexin 2 and selective orexin 1 antagonists are currently
in development as well. Competition of endogenous
neurotransmitter with drug for the same receptor is
a concept also discussed in Chapter 7 regarding D3
antagonists/partial agonists and dopamine itself at the D3
receptor (see Figure 7-72).
Serotonergic Hypnotics

One of the most popular hypnotics is the 5HT2A/ α1/H1
antagonist trazodone (Figure 7-46), even though this
agent is not specifically approved for the treatment of
424

3

6

Figure 10-35 Orexin receptor antagonists. The
dual orexin receptor antagonists suvorexant and
lemborexant are shown here. Suvorexant has
comparable affinity for orexin 1 (OX1R) and orexin
2 (OX2R) receptors, while lemborexant has higher
affinity for OX2R than for OX1R.

insomnia (see Chapter 7 for discussion of trazodone’s use
in depression and Figures 7-45 through 7-47). Trazodone,
like the DORAs, is another agent that works to reduce
arousal in insomnia rather than by enhancing sleep drive.
Trazodone’s hypnotic mechanism is via blockade of the
arousal neurotransmitters serotonin, norepinephrine,
and histamine (Figure 7-46). Blockade of α1-adrenergic
and H1 histaminergic pathways is discussed as a side
effect of some drugs for psychosis in Chapter 5 and
illustrated in Figures 5-13 and 5-14. Indeed, one does
not want blockade of all these arousal neurotransmitters
in the daytime. However, when α1 blockade is combined




<<<PAGE 441>>>

Chapter 10: Disorders of Sleep and Wakefulness and Their Treatment

from hypothalamus
(LH/PH)

B

B
B

A
A

DORA

DORA

G

OX2R

OX1R

GIRK

G

sleep, which can correlate with restorative sleep and even
improvement in daytime pain and fatigue.
Trazodone was initially studied for depression at high
doses that also block serotonin reuptake (Figure 7-45),
and given in a short-acting immediate-release
formulation two or three times a day. Although effective
as an antidepressant, it also caused daytime sedation. It
was serendipitously discovered that lowering the dose
of immediate-release trazodone and giving it at night
made for a very effective hypnotic, which wore off before
morning, and thus a new hypnotic agent was born and
has continued to be the most commonly prescribed
agent for sleep in the world. In order for trazodone to
have optimum antidepressant actions, the dose has to be
increased, and for it to be tolerated, it has to be given in a
once-daily controlled-release formulation that generates
blood levels above those needed for antidepressant action
yet below those needed for sedative hypnotic action
(Figure 7-47). Trazodone has not been associated with
tolerance, withdrawal, dependence, or rebound.
Histamine 1 Antagonists as Hypnotics

Ca++
NMDA

asleep
Figure 10-36 Blockade of orexin receptors. Orexin
neurotransmission is mediated by two types of postsynaptic
G-protein-coupled receptors, orexin 1 (OX1R) and orexin 2
(OX2R). OX1R are particularly expressed in the noradrenergic
locus coeruleus whereas OX2R are highly expressed in the
histaminergic tuberomammillary nucleus (TMN). Blockade of
orexin receptors by dual orexin receptor antagonists (DORAs)
prevents the excitatory effects of orexin neurotransmitters. In
particular, blockade of OX2R leads to decreased expression
of NMDA (N-methyl-D-aspartate) glutamate receptors and
prevents inactivation of G-protein-regulated inward rectifying
potassium channels (GIRK). LH/PH: lateral hypothalamus/
posterior hypothalamus.

with H1 blockade (described below and illustrated in
Figures 10-38 through 10-40), and these actions are
further combined with 5HT2A antagonism, a powerful
hypnotic effect results. 5HT2A antagonism (Figures 7-45
and 7-46) specifically enhances slow-wave sleep/deep

It is widely appreciated that antihistamines are sedating.
Antihistamines are popular as over-the-counter sleep aids
(especially those containing diphenhydramine/Benadryl
or doxylamine) (Figure 10-38). Because antihistamines
have been widely used for many years not only as
hypnotic agents but also for the treatment of allergies,
there is the common misperception that the properties
of classic agents such as diphenhydramine apply to any
drug with antihistaminic properties. This includes the
idea that all antihistamines have “anticholinergic” side
effects such as blurred vision, constipation, memory
problems, dry mouth; that they cause next-day hangover
effects when used as hypnotics at night; that tolerance
develops to their hypnotic actions; and that they cause
weight gain. It now seems that some of these ideas about
antihistamines are due to the fact that most agents with
potent antihistamine properties have anticholinergic
actions as well (Figures 10-38 and 10-39). This applies
not only to antihistamines used for allergy, but also to
drugs approved for use in psychosis (e.g., chlorpromazine
Figure 5-27 and quetiapine Figure 5-45) and depression
(such as doxepin Figure 10-39 and other tricyclic
antidepressants Figure 7-67) but also used at low doses as
hypnotic agents.
The tricyclic antidepressant doxepin is an interesting
case because of its very high affinity for the H1 receptor.
At low to very low doses, far lower than needed for the
treatment of depression, it is a relatively selective H1
425

10




<<<PAGE 444>>>

STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

you go to sleep, and as soon as the drug falls below this
threshold, you awaken. In practice, these effects may not
be immediate, and being near the threshold may mean
sleepiness but not sleep. Nevertheless, this is an important
concept because it is not so much the pharmacokinetic
half-life that is important for a hypnotic drug (i.e., how
long until half the drug is gone), it is its duration of time
above the sleep threshold. These concepts are illustrated
in Figure 10-41A–D; the ideal profile for a hypnotic is
shown in Figure 10-41A: neither too short a time above
the threshold nor too long a time, but “just right”: the
Goldilocks solution. In Figure 10-41B and 10-41C, the

concept of too long a half-life, but more importantly too
long above the threshold, is shown: “too hot” and the
result is next-day residual effects. Finally, the concept
of too short a half-life, but more importantly not long
enough above the threshold, is shown (Figure 10-41D):
“too cold” and the result is early morning awakenings
before the desired time of rising. These same concepts of
a drug needing to pierce a threshold, and sustain its level
above that threshold to be effective, apply to another area
of psychopharmacology: namely, the use of stimulants for
the treatment of ADHD (attention deficit hyperactivity
disorder). This will be discussed in Chapter 11 on ADHD.

The Goldilocks Solution:
The Ideal Hypnotic Agent

5

4

sleep maintenance

drug
concentration 3

sleep
onset

no hangover

2

serotonin histamine antagonist
threshold (80%)

1

DORA threshold (65%)
GABAA threshold (25%)
0

24

48

72

96

120

144

hours (taken nightly)
duration above threshold: 8 hours
examples: eszopiclone (Lunesta)
zolpidem CR (Ambien CR)
low-dose trazodone (Desyrel)
low-dose doxepin antihistamines
survorexant (Belsomra)
lemborexant (Dayvigo)

A

Way Too Hot:

Ultralong Half-Life Hypnotics Can
Cause Drug Accumulation (Toxicity)
night day

toxicity

5

4

drug
concentration 3
2

relevant threshold

1

0

24

48

72

96

120

144

hours (taken nightly)
B

428

duration above threshold: 24-150 hours
examples: flurazepam (Dalmane)
quazepam (Doral)

Figure 10-41A, B Pharmacokinetics
of hypnotics, part 1. (A) For GABAA
medications, the critical threshold
of receptor occupancy for onset of
hypnotic effects is 25–30%, for dual
orexin receptor antagonists (DORAs)
it is 65%, and for serotonin and
histamine antagonists it is thought to
be 80%. Both the onset to achieving
the threshold, and the duration of
time above the sleep threshold,
are important for efficacy. The ideal
hypnotic agent would have a duration
above the threshold of approximately
8 hours. (B) Hypnotics with ultra-long
half-lives (greater than 24 hours; for
example, flurazepam and quazepam)
can cause drug accumulation with
chronic use. This can result in too long
a duration of time above the sleep
threshold, and can cause impairment
that has been associated with increased
risk of falls, particularly in the elderly.




<<<PAGE 551>>>

Chapter 12: Dementia: Causes, Symptomatic Treatments, and the Neurotransmitter Network Acetylcholine

inconclusive in terms of their efficacy in treating major
depressive disorder in dementia; however, SSRIs (e.g.,
citalopram but has QT prolongation; escitalopram may
have similar efficacy without QT prolongation) may
have some additional applicability towards ameliorating
agitation and inappropriate behaviors in patients with
dementia. Although considered relatively tolerable, SSRIs
may be associated with increased falls and osteoporosis,
and they may have interactions with other medications.
Additionally, SSRIs may worsen some symptoms of
Parkinson’s disease such as restless leg syndrome, periodic
limb movements, and REM sleep behavior disorders.
Therefore, if a trial of an SSRI (or any other antidepressant
medication) is deemed necessary, the lowest effective dose
should be used and continuous monitoring should be
exercised.
Another agent for treating depression in dementia
is trazodone, which blocks the serotonin transporter at
antidepressant doses (see Chapter 7 and Figures 7-44
and 7-45). Trazodone also has serotonin 2A and 2C,
H1 histamine and α1-adrenergic antagonist properties
(Figures 7-44 and 7-45), which can make it very sedating.
At low doses, trazodone does not adequately block
serotonin reuptake but retains its other properties (Figure
7-46). Because trazodone has a relatively short half-life

Treating Depression

May be ineffective because...

Pharmacological
Interventions

(6–8 hours), if dosed only once daily at night, particularly
at low doses, it can improve sleep without having daytime
effects. The utility of trazodone in treating secondary
behavioral symptoms in patients with dementia may lie
more in its ability to improve sleep rather than depression.
Trazodone may also improve other behavioral symptoms
of dementia especially in FTD but not particularly in AD.
Vortioxetine (Chapter 7 and Figure 7-49) in particular
may improve cognitive function in depression, especially
processing speed (Figure 7-50) as can some SNRIs like
duloxetine (Figure 7-29) in the elderly with depression.
However, these pro-cognitive effects have not been
demonstrated specifically in dementia patients who have
depression.
Pseudobulbar Affect (Pathological Laughing and
Crying)

Pseudobulbar affect (PBA) is an emotional expression
disorder, characterized by uncontrolled crying or
laughing that may be disproportionate or inappropriate
to the social context. It is often mistaken for a mood
disorder but is actually a disorder of the expression of
affect, which is inconsistent or disproportionate to mood.
PBA can accompany a variety of neurodegenerative
diseases such as AD and various other dementias,

Figure 12-50 Treating depression in
patients with dementia. The treatment
of depression in elderly patients with
dementia may be complicated by the
fact that the neural circuits acted on
by pharmacological interventions for
depression may have degenerated.
Although psychosocial interventions
are an appropriate option, they may be
difficult to implement for cognitively
impaired individuals.

acting on neural circuits which
may be degenerated

12

Psychosocial
Interventions

striving to change cognitive
functioning in cognitively
impaired individual

535




<<<PAGE 603>>>

Suggested Reading and Selected References

BALANCE investigators and collaborators, et al. (2010)
Lithium plus valproate combination therapy versus
monotherapy for relapse prevention in bipolar I disorder
(BALANCE): a randomized open-label trial. Lancet 375:
385–95.
Baldessarini RJ, Tondo L, Vazquez GH (2019) Pharmacological
treatment of adult bipolar disorder. Mol Psychiatry 24:
198–217.
Bang-Andersen B, Ruhland T, Jorgensen M, et al. (2011)
Discovery of 1-[2-(2,4-dimethylphenylsulfanyl)phenyl]
piperazine (LuAA21004): a novel multimodal compound
for the treatment of major depressive disorder. J Med Chem
54: 3206–21.
Carhart-Harris RL, Bolstridge M, Day CMG, et al.
(2018) Psilocybin with psychological support for
treatment-resistant depression: six month follow up.
Psychopharmacology 235: 399–408.
Carhart-Harris RL, Bolstridge M, Rucker J, et al. (2016)
Psilocybin with psychological support for treatment
resistant depression: an open label feasibility study. Lancet
Psychiatry 3: 619–27.
Carhart-Harris RL, Goodwin GM (2017) The therapeutic
potential of psychedelic drugs: past, present and future,
Neuropsychopharmacology 42: 2105–13.
Carhart-Harris RL, Leech R, Williams TM, et al. (2012)
Implications for psychedelic assisted psychotherapy:
a functional magnetic resonance imaging study
with psilocybin. Br J Psychiatry: doi:10.1192/bjp.
bp.111.103309.
Chiu CT, Chuan DM (2010) Molecular actions and therapeutic
potential of lithium in preclinical and clinical studies of
CNS disorders. Pharmacol Ther 128: 281–304.
Cipriani A, Pretty H, Hawton K, Geddes JR (2005) Lithium in
the prevention of suicidal behavior and all-cause mortality
in patients with mood disorders: a systematic review of
randomized trials. Am J Psychiatry 162: 1805–19.
Frye MA, Grunze H, Suppes T, et al. (2007) A placebocontrolled evaluation of adjunctive modafinil in the
treatment of bipolar depression. Am J Psychiatry 164:
1242–9.
Grady M, Stahl SM (2012) Practical guide for prescribing
MAOI: Debunking myths and removing barriers. CNS
Spectrums 17: 2–10.
Mork A, Pehrson A, Brennum LT, et al. (2012)
Pharmacological effects of Lu AA21004: a novel
multimodal compound for the treatment of major
depressive disorder. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 340: 666–75.
Pasquali L, Busceti CL, Fulceri F, Paparelli A, Fornai F (2010)
Intracellular pathways underlying the effects of lithium.
Behav Pharmacol 21: 473–92.

Perlis RH, Ostacher MJ, Goldberg JF, et al. (2010) Transition
to mania during treatment of bipolar depression.
Neuropsychopharmacology 35: 2545–52.
Pompili M, Vazquez GH, Forte A, Morrissette DA, Stahl
SM (2020) Pharmacological treatment of mixed
states. Psychiatr Clin N Am 43: 157–86. doi:10.1016/j.
psc.2019.10.015
Schwartz TL, Siddiqui US, Stahl SM (2011) Vilazodone: a
brief pharmacologic and clinical review of the novel SPARI
(serotonin partial agonist and reuptake inhibitor). Ther
Adv Psychopharmacol 1: 81–7.
Settimo L, Taylor D (2018) Evaluating the dose-dependent
mechanism of action of trazodone by estimation of
occupancies for different brain neurotransmitter targets. J
Psychopharmacol 32: 960104.
Stahl SM (2009) Mechanism of action of trazodone: a
multifunctional drug. CNS Spectrums 14: 536–46.
Stahl SM (2012) Psychotherapy as an epigenetic “drug”:
psychiatric therapeutics target symptoms linked to
malfunctioning brain circuits with psychotherapy as well
as with drugs. J Clin Pharm Ther 37: 249–53.
Stahl SM (2014) Mechanism of action of the SPARI
vilazodone: (serotonin partial agonist reuptake inhibitor).
CNS Spectrums 19: 105–9.
Stahl SM (2014) Mechanism of action of agomelatine:
a novel antidepressant exploiting synergy between
monoaminergic and melatonergic properties. CNS
Spectrums 19: 207–12.
Stahl SM (2015) Modes and nodes explain the mechanism
of action of vortioxetine, a multimodal agent (MMA):
enhancing serotonin release by combining serotonin
(5HT) transporter inhibition with actions at 5HT receptors
(5HT1A, 5HT1B, 5HT1D, 5HT7 receptors). CNS Spectrums
20: 93–7.
Stahl SM (2015) Modes and nodes explain the mechanism of
action of vortioxetine, multimodal agent (MMA): actions
at serotonin receptors may enhance downstream release of
four pro-cognitive neurotransmitters. CNS Spectrums 20:
515–19.
Stahl SM, Fava M, Trivedi M (2010) Agomelatine in the
treatment of major depressive disorder: an 8 week,
multicenter, randomized, placebo-controlled trial. J Clin
Psychiatry 71: 616–26.
Undurraga J, Baldessarini RJ, Valenti M, et al. (2012) Bipolar
depression: clinical correlates of receiving antidepressants.
J Affect Disord 139: 89–93.
Zajecka J, Schatzberg A, Stahl SM, et al. (2010) Efficacy and
safety of agomelatine in the treatment of major depressive
disorder: a multicenter, randomized, double-blind, placebocontrolled trial. J Clin Psychopharmacol 30: 135–44.

587


