<<<PAGE 51>>>

Chapter 2: Transporters, Receptors, and Enzymes

One difference between transport of neurotransmitters
by the SLC6 gene family and transport of glutamate
by the SLC1 gene family is that glutamate does not
seem to cotransport chloride with sodium when it also
cotransports glutamate. Also, glutamate transport is
almost always characterized by the countertransport of
potassium, whereas this is not always the case with SLC6
gene family transporters. Glutamate transporters may
work together as trimers rather than dimers, as the SLC6
transporters seem to do. The functional significance
of these differences remains obscure, but may become
more apparent if clinically useful psychopharmacological
agents that target glutamate transporters are discovered.
Since it may often be desirable to diminish rather than
enhance glutamate neurotransmission, the future utility
of glutamate transporters as therapeutic targets is also
unclear.
Where Are the Transporters for Histamine and
Neuropeptides?

It is an interesting observation that apparently not all
neurotransmitters are regulated by reuptake transporters.
The central neurotransmitter histamine apparently does
not have a transporter for it presynaptically (although
it is transported into synaptic vesicles by VMAT2,
the same transporter used by the monoamines – see
Figure 2-2B). Histamine’s inactivation is thus thought
to be entirely enzymatic. The same can be said for
neuropeptides, since reuptake pumps and presynaptic
transporters have not been found for them, and are thus
thought to be lacking for this class of neurotransmitter.
Inactivation of neuropeptides is apparently by diffusion,
sequestration, and enzymatic destruction, but not
by presynaptic transport. It is always possible that a
transporter will be discovered in the future for some of
these neurotransmitters, but at the present time there are
no known presynaptic transporters for either histamine
or neuropeptides.
Vesicular Transporters: Subtypes and Function

Vesicular transporters for the monoamines (VMATs)
are members of the SLC18 gene family and have already
been discussed above. They are shown in Figure 2-2B
and listed in Table 2-3. The vesicular transporter for
acetylcholine – also a member of the SLC18 gene family
but known as VAChT – is shown in Figure 2-2B and
listed in Table 2-3. The GABA vesicular transporter is a
member of the SLC32 gene family and is called VIAAT
(vesicular inhibitory amino acid transporter; shown in

Figure 2-2B and Table 2-3). Finally, vesicular transporters
for glutamate, called vGluT1–3 (vesicular glutamate
transporters 1, 2, and 3), are members of the SLC17 gene
family and are also shown in Figure 2-2B and listed in
Table 2-3. A novel 12-transmembrane-region synaptic
vesicle transporter of uncertain mechanism and with
unclear substrates, called the SV2A transporter and
localized within the synaptic vesicle membrane, binds the
anticonvulsant levetiracetam, perhaps interfering with
neurotransmitter release and thereby reducing seizures.
How do neurotransmitters get inside synaptic
vesicles? In the case of vesicular transporters, storage
of neurotransmitters is facilitated by a proton ATPase,
known as the “proton pump” that utilizes energy to
pump positively charged protons continuously out of the
synaptic vesicle (Figure 2-2B). The neurotransmitters can
then be concentrated against a gradient by substituting
their own positive charge inside the vesicle for the
positive charge of the proton being pumped out. Thus,
neurotransmitters are not so much transported as they
are “antiported” – i.e., they go in while the protons
are actively transported out, keeping charge inside the
vesicle constant. This concept is shown in Figure 2-2B
for the VMAT transporting dopamine, in exchange
for protons. Contrast this with Figure 2-2A where a
monoamine transporter on the presynaptic membrane
is cotransporting a monoamine along with sodium
and chloride, but with the help of a sodium–potassium
ATPase (sodium pump) rather than a proton pump.
Vesicular Transporters (SLC18 Gene Family) as Targets
of Psychotropic Drugs

Vesicular transporters for acetylcholine (SLC18 gene
family), GABA (SLC32 gene family), and glutamate
(SLC17 gene family) are not known to be targeted
by any drug utilized by humans. However, vesicular
transporters for monoamines in the SLC18 gene family
(VMATs), particularly those in dopamine neurons,
are targeted by several drugs, including amphetamine
(as a transported substrate) and tetrabenazine and
its derivatives deutetrabenazine and valbenazine (as
inhibitors, see Chapter 5) . Amphetamine thus has
two targets: monoamine transporters discussed above
as well as VMATs discussed here. In contrast, other
drugs for ADHD, such as methylphenidate, and the
so-called “stimulant” drug of abuse cocaine, target
only the monoamine transporters, and in much the
same manner as described for SSRIs at the serotonin
transporter.

35

2




<<<PAGE 88>>>

STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Table 3-4 Subtypes of voltage-sensitive calcium channels (VSCCs)

Type

Pore-forming

Location

Function

L

Cav1.2, 1.3

Cell bodies, dendrites

Gene expression, synaptic integration

N

Cav 2.2

Nerve terminals
Dendrites, cell bodies

Transmitter release
Synaptic integration

P/Q

Cav, 2.1

Nerve terminals

Transmitter release

Dendrites, cell bodies

Synaptic integration

R

Cav, 2.3

Nerve terminals
Cell bodies, dendrites

Transmitter release
Repetitive firing, synaptic integration

T

Cav, 3.1, 3.2, 3.3

Cell bodies, dendrites

Pacemaking, repetitive firing, synaptic
integration

Docking of Synaptic Vesicle with Presynaptic Membrane,
VSCC (Voltage-Sensitive Calcium Channel), and Snare Proteins
VMAT

synaptobrevin

synaptotagmin

SV2A

synaptic vesicle
membrane

syntaxin

SNAP 25

ß

N
P/Q
presynaptic membrane
2
++

Ca

Figure 3-24 Snare proteins. Proteins that link the voltage-sensitive calcium channel to the synaptic vesicle, called snare proteins,
are shown here; they include SNAP 25 (synaptosomal-associated protein 25), synaptobrevin, syntaxin, and synaptotagmin. A VMAT
(vesicular monoamine transporter) is shown on the left. Another transporter, SV2A, is shown on the right. The mechanism of this
transporter is not yet clear, but the anticonvulsant levetiracetam is known to bind to this site.

72


