<<<PAGE 64>>>

STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

inhibition is depicted as binding with strings (Figure
2-13A), such that the substrate can cut them with
scissors (Figure 2-13B) and displace the enzyme
inhibitor, and bind the enzyme itself with its own strings
(Figure 2-13C).
These concepts can be applied potentially to any
enzyme system. Several enzymes are involved in
neurotransmission, including in the synthesis and
destruction of neurotransmitters, as well as in signal
transduction. Only a few enzymes are known to be
targeted by psychotropic drugs currently used in
clinical practice, namely monoamine oxidase (MAO),
acetylcholinesterase, and glycogen synthase kinase
(GSK). MAO inhibitors are discussed in more detail
in Chapter 7 on treatments for mood disorders and
acetylcholinesterase inhibitors are discussed in more
detail in Chapter 12 on dementia. Briefly, regarding
GSK, the antimanic agent lithium may target this

important enzyme in the signal transduction
pathway of neurotrophic factors (Figure 2-14). That
is, some neurotrophins, growth factors, and other
signaling pathways act through a specific downstream
phosphoprotein, an enzyme called GSK-3 (glycogen
synthase kinase), to promote cell death (so-called
proapoptotic actions). Lithium has the capacity to
inhibit this enzyme (Figure 2-14B). It is possible
that inhibition of GSK-3 is physiologically relevant,
because this action could lead to neuroprotective
actions, long-term plasticity, and may contribute to
the antimanic and mood-stabilizing actions known to
be associated with lithium. It is also possible that the
antimanic agent valproate and the neurostimulatory
treatment for depression ECT (electroconvulsive
therapy) may have actions on GSK-3 as well (Figure
2-14B). The development of novel GSK-3 inhibitors is
in progress.

GSK-3 (Glycogen Synthase Kinase):
Possible Target for Lithium and Other Mood Stabilizers

neurotrophin

insulin
IGF-1

Wnt
glycoproteins

neurotrophin

insulin
IGF-1

Wnt
glycoproteins

membrane

P

GSK-3

P

lithium
? valproate
? ECT

GSK-3

proapoptotic
neuroprotective
long-term plasticity
antimanic / mood stabilizer
Figure 2-14 Receptor tyrosine kinases. Receptor tyrosine kinases are potential targets for novel psychotropic drugs. Left: Some
neurotrophins, growth factors, and other signaling pathways act through a downstream phosphoprotein, an enzyme called GSK-3
(glycogen synthase kinase), to promote cell death (proapoptotic actions). Right: Lithium and possibly some other mood stabilizers
may inhibit this enzyme, which could lead to neuroprotective actions and long-term plasticity as well as possibly contribute to moodstabilizing actions.

48




<<<PAGE 358>>>

STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

lithium and various anticonvulsant ion channel blockers
that act by very different mechanisms (described below).
More surprising yet is that some of these same serotonin/
dopamine antagonists/partial agonists are effective for
bipolar depression, albeit by mechanisms likely distinct
from D2 antagonism/partial agonism. The questions
that arise are how serotonin 2/dopamine 2 antagonists
and dopamine 2/serotonin 1A partial agonists work in
both the manic and depressed poles of bipolar disorder.
More recently, some of these same serotonin/dopamine
drugs have evidence of efficacy in unipolar depression
as augmenting agents to SSRIs/SNRIs when there is
inadequate response, as discussed above. Furthermore,
some of these same serotonin/dopamine drugs now
have additional evidence of efficacy in unipolar and
bipolar depression with mixed features of mania. Do they
work by the same mechanisms across the entire bipolar
spectrum (Figure 6-7)? Is this a class effect of these drugs
or do specific drugs work in some but not all parts of the
bipolar spectrum?
Putative Pharmacological Mechanism of Serotonin/
Dopamine Antagonists/Partial Agonists in Mania

The short answer to the question of how serotonin/
dopamine blockers work in mania is that we do not
really know. On the one hand, PET scans of patients
with mania show the same excessive presynaptic
dopamine levels and release in mesostriatal dopamine
neurons in acute bipolar mania as for acute psychosis in
schizophrenia, described extensively in Chapter 4 and
illustrated in Figures 4-15, 4-16, and Figure 5-2. Thus,
blocking the excessive dopamine at D2 receptors should
have as much of an antimanic effect in bipolar mania as
it has an antipsychotic effect in schizophrenia. Indeed,
acute bipolar mania is treated with serotonin/dopamine
blockers in much the same manner as acute psychosis is
treated in schizophrenia, including dosing and expected
onset of action within minutes to hours. However, not all
agents in the serotonin/dopamine blocker class approved
to treat schizophrenia are also approved to treat acute
bipolar mania, and not all of those approved for acute
bipolar mania are approved for bipolar maintenance (see
Table 7-1). Differences in receptor binding profiles could
explain why some agents are approved in mania and
others not; commercial considerations could also explain
why some agents are not approved in mania. To enhance
antimanic response and to prevent relapse into another
episode of mania, lithium and valproate are commonly
used in conjunction with those dopamine/serotonin

342

blockers approved for the treatment of mania, but this is
not done for the treatment of schizophrenia, as lithium
and valproate do not clearly augment the efficacy of
serotonin/dopamine blockers in schizophrenia.
Serotonin/Dopamine Antagonists/Partial Agonists
across the Depression Spectrum: Bipolar Depression,
Depression with Mixed Features, and as Adjuncts to
SSRIs/SNRIs in Unipolar Major Depression

The serotonin/dopamine antagonists/partial agonists
have proven to be quite versatile therapeutics: from
schizophrenia, to mania, to adjuncts for SSRIs/SNRIs in
unipolar depression, as we have discussed in this chapter
so far. Here we consider the extension of therapeutic use
of at least some of the agents in this class to the treatment
of bipolar depression and the closely related state of
major depressive episodes with mixed features of mania.
A major paradigm shift is afoot in the treatment of
bipolar depression and depression with mixed features.
We used to ask: “Don’t we treat all forms of depression
with so-called antidepressants, drugs that inhibit the
reuptake of monoamines?” Although most patients with
depression, including those with bipolar depression and
depression with mixed features, do receive monoamine
reuptake inhibiting drugs, the modern answer to
this question is increasingly becoming a resounding
“No!!” Practice guidelines and US FDA approvals are
moving away from the treatment of bipolar depression
or depression with mixed features with the standard
monoamine reuptake inhibiting agents that are so
commonly used for the treatment of unipolar depression.
Reuptake inhibitors are increasingly reserved to treat
patients with unipolar depression only if they do not
have mixed features, and patients with bipolar depression
only as second-line agents to augment other agents. Best
practice is evolving for bipolar depression or depression
with mixed features, so now first-line treatment is one of
the specifically approved serotonin/dopamine blockers,
not a monoamine reuptake inhibitor. However, there
is plenty of controversy over this recommendation, as
many prescribers and some experts still advocate for
monoamine reuptake inhibitors in some patients with
bipolar depression. But more and more studies are
showing failure of the monoamine reuptake inhibiting
drugs to work consistently in bipolar depression or in
mixed features, and, furthermore, monoamine reuptake
inhibitors can induce intolerable activating side effects
and even manic episodes and suicidality in patients
with bipolar/mixed depression. Other studies do show




<<<PAGE 362>>>

STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Possible Mechanism of Lithium Action on Downstream
Signal Transduction Cascades
neurotrophin

NT1

GE

NT

++

++

Figure 7-74 Lithium’s mechanism
of action. Although lithium is
the oldest treatment for bipolar
disorder, its mechanism of action
is still not well understood. Several
possible mechanisms exist and
are shown here. Lithium may work
by affecting signal transduction,
perhaps through its inhibition of
second-messenger enzymes such as
inositol monophosphatase (right), by
modulation of G proteins (middle), or
by interaction at various sites within
downstream signal transduction
cascades, including glycogen
synthase kinase 3 (GSK-3) (left).

2
P

GSK-3

= lithium

promotes neuroprotection
long-term plasticity
antimanic / mood stabilizer

inhibition of GSK-3 (glycogen synthase kinase 3) and
protein kinase C (Figure 7-74).
However lithium works, it is proven effective in manic
episodes, and in maintenance of recurrence, especially
for manic episodes and, perhaps to a lesser extent, for
depressive episodes. Lithium is well established to help
prevent suicide in patients with mood disorders. It is
also used to treat depressive episodes in bipolar disorder
and as an augmenting agent to drugs for depression
in treatment-resistant unipolar depression, but is not
formally approved for these uses.
A number of factors have led to an unfortunate
decline in the use of lithium in recent years, including
the entry of multiple new treatment options into the
therapeutic armamentarium for bipolar disorder, the
side effects of lithium, and the monitoring burden that is
part of prescribing lithium. The modern use of lithium
by experts departs from its classic use as a high-dose
monotherapy for euphoric mania, with lithium often
utilized now as one member of a portfolio of treatments,
often allowing once-daily administration and at lower
doses when combined with other mood stabilizers.
Well-known side effects of lithium include
gastrointestinal symptoms such as dyspepsia, nausea,
vomiting, and diarrhea, as well as weight gain, hair
loss, acne, tremor, sedation, decreased cognition, and
incoordination. There are also potential long-term
346

adverse effects upon the thyroid and kidney. Lithium has
a narrow therapeutic window, requiring monitoring of
plasma drug levels.
Anticonvulsants as “Mood Stabilizers”

Based upon theories that mania may “kindle” further
episodes of mania, a logical parallel with seizure disorders
was drawn, since seizures can “kindle” more seizures.
Several anticonvulsants (Table 7-3) are categorized on the
basis of whether they are “mania-minded,” i.e., treat from
above and stabilize from above (Figure 7-7); “depressionminded,” i.e., treat from below and stabilize from below
(Figure 7-8); or both. Because the known anticonvulsants
carbamazepine and valproate proved effective in treating
the manic phase of bipolar disorder, this has led to the
idea that any anticonvulsant would be a mood stabilizer,
especially for mania. However, this has not proven to be
the case (Table 7-3) since anticonvulsants do not all act
by the same pharmacological mechanisms, as discussed
below. These agents for mania or bipolar depression are
better classified for their pharmacological mechanism of
action at ion channels rather than as “mood stabilizers”
or “anticonvulsants.” Numerous mood stabilizers that
are also anticonvulsants are discussed below, including
not only those with proven efficacy in different phases of
bipolar disorder, but also those with dubious efficacy in
bipolar disorder (Table 7-3).




<<<PAGE 363>>>

Chapter 7: Treatments for Mood Disorders

Table 7-3 Anticonvulsant mood stabilizers

Agent

Putative clinical actions
Epilepsy

Mania-minded

Depression-minded

Treat from
above

Stabilize
from above

Treat from
below

Stabilize from
below

Valproate

++++

++++

++

+

+/−

Carbamazepine

++++

++++

++

+

+/−

Lamotrigine

++++

+/−

++++

+++

++++

Oxcarbazepine/licarbazepine

++++

++

+

+/−

+/−

Riluzole

+

+

+/−

Topiramate

++++

+/−

+/−

Gabapentin

++++

+/−

+/−

Pregabalin

++++

+/−

+/−

Anticonvulsants with Proven Efficacy in Bipolar Disorder
Valproic Acid (Valproate, Sodium Valproate)

As for all anticonvulsants, the exact mechanism of action
of valproic acid (also, sodium valproate, valproate) is
uncertain; however, even less may be known about the
mechanism of valproate than for other anticonvulsants.
Various hypotheses are discussed here, and summarized in
Figures 7-75 through 7-78. At least three possibilities exist
for how valproic acid works: inhibiting voltage-sensitive
sodium channels (Figure 7-76), boosting the actions of the
neurotransmitter GABA (γ-aminobutyric acid) (Figure
7-77), and regulating downstream signal transduction
cascades (Figure 7-78). It is not known whether these
actions explain the mood-stabilizing actions, the
anticonvulsant actions, the anti-migraine actions, or the
side effects of valproic acid. Obviously, this simple molecule
has multiple and complex clinical effects, and research
is trying to determine which of the various possibilities
explain the “mood-stabilizing” antimanic effects of valproic
acid so that new agents with more efficacy and fewer
side effects can be developed by targeting the relevant
pharmacological mechanism for bipolar disorder.
One hypothesis to explain mood-stabilizing antimanic
actions is the possibility that valproate acts to diminish
excessive neurotransmission by diminishing the flow of
ions through voltage-sensitive sodium channels (VSSCs)
(Figure 7-76). VSSCs are discussed in Chapter 3 and
illustrated in Figures 3-19 through 3-21. No specific
molecular site of action for valproate has been identified,
but it is possible that valproate may change the sensitivity
of sodium channels by altering phosphorylation of

7

valproic acid

Na+
++
Ca

Glu
GABA
Figure 7-75 Valproic acid. Shown here is an icon of the
pharmacological actions of valproic acid, an anticonvulsant
used in the treatment of bipolar disorder. Valproic acid (also
valproate) may work by interfering with voltage-sensitive sodium
channels, enhancing the inhibitory actions of γ-aminobutyric
acid (GABA), and regulating downstream signal transduction
cascades, although which of these actions may be related to
mood stabilization is not clear. Valproate may also interact with
other ion channels, such as voltage-sensitive calcium channels,
and also indirectly block glutamate (Glu) actions.

347




<<<PAGE 364>>>

STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Possible Sites of Action of Valproate on VSSCs
= valproate

P

P

2

2
4
P0

GE

GE

Figure 7-76 Possible sites of action of valproate on voltage-sensitive sodium channels (VSSCs). Valproate may exert antimanic
effects by changing the sensitivity of VSSCs, perhaps by directly binding to channel subunits or inhibiting phosphorylating enzymes
that regulate the sensitivity of these ion channels. Inhibition of VSSCs would lead to reduced sodium influx and, in turn, potentially to
reduced glutamate excitatory neurotransmission, which is a possible mechanism for mania efficacy.

7-77 Possible sites of action of valproate on
Possible Sites of Action of Valproate on GABA Figure
γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA). Valproate’s antimanic effects
may be due to enhancement of GABA neurotransmission,
perhaps by inhibiting GABA reuptake, enhancing GABA
release, or interfering with the metabolism of GABA by
GABA-T (GABA transaminase).

GABA neuron

= valproate

?

?
?

E
GABA

348

GABA-T

inactive
substance




<<<PAGE 365>>>

Chapter 7: Treatments for Mood Disorders

sodium channels, either by binding directly to the VSSC
or its regulatory units, or by inhibiting phosphorylating
enzymes (Figure 7-76). If less sodium is able to pass into
neurons, this may lead to diminished release of glutamate
and therefore less excitatory neurotransmission, but
this is only a theory. There may be additional effects of
valproate on other voltage-sensitive ion channels, but
these are poorly characterized and may relate to side
effects as well as to therapeutic effects.
Another idea is that valproate enhances the actions
of GABA, either by increasing its release, decreasing its
reuptake, or slowing its metabolic inactivation (Figure
7-77). The direct site of action of valproate that causes the
enhancement of GABA remains unknown, but there is good
evidence that the downstream effect of valproate ultimately
does result in more GABA activity, and thus more inhibitory
neurotransmission, possibly explaining antimanic actions.
Finally, a number of downstream actions on complex
signal transduction cascades have been described (Figure
7-78). Like lithium, valproate may inhibit GSK-3, but it may
also target many other downstream sites, from blockade
of phosphokinase C (PKC) and MARCKS (myristoylated
alanine-rich C kinase substrate), to activating various
signals that promote neuroprotection and long-term

plasticity such as ERK (extracellular signal-regulated
kinase) kinase, BCL2 (cytoprotective protein B-cell
lymphoma/leukemia-2 gene), GAP43 (growth associated
protein 43), and others (Figure 7-78). The effects of these
signal transduction cascades are only now being clarified,
and which of these possible effects of valproate might be
relevant to mood-stabilizing actions are not yet understood.
Valproate is proven effective for the acute manic phase
of bipolar disorder, and is commonly used long-term to
prevent recurrence of mania, although its prophylactic
effects have not been as well established as its acute
effects in mania (Table 7-3). Antidepressant actions of
valproate have also not been well established, nor has it
been shown to convincingly stabilize against recurrent
depressive episodes, but there may be some efficacy for
the depressed phase of bipolar disorder in some patients.
Some experts believe valproic acid is more effective than
lithium for rapid cycling and mixed episodes of mania.
In reality, such episodes are very difficult to treat, and
combinations of two or more mood stabilizers, including
lithium plus valproate plus serotonin/dopamine blockers,
are usually in order. For optimum efficacy, it may be
ideal to push the dose of valproate, but no drug works
if your patient refuses to take it, and valproic acid often

Possible Sites of Action of Valproate on Downstream
Signal Transduction Cascades
neurotrophin

NT1

GE

Ras/Raf/MEK

2

P

ERK
activation

GSK-3
= valproate

Figure 7-78 Possible sites of action
of valproate on downstream signal
transduction cascades. Valproate
has been shown to have multiple
downstream effects on signal
transduction cascades, which may
be involved in its antimanic effects.
Valproate inhibits glycogen synthase
kinase 3 (GSK-3), phosphokinase C
(PKC), and myristoylated alaninerich C kinase substrate (MARCKS).
In addition, valproate activates
signals that promote neuroprotection
and long-term plasticity, such as
extracellular signal-regulated kinase
(ERK), cytoprotective protein B-cell
lymphoma/leukemia-2 gene (BCL2),
and growth associated protein 43
(GAP43).

PKC
promotes neuroprotection
long-term plasticity
antimanic / mood stabilizer
MARCKS
BCL2
activation

GAP43
activation

neuronal genome

349

7




<<<PAGE 366>>>

STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

has unacceptable side effects such as hair loss, weight
gain, and sedation. Certain problems can be avoided by
lowering the dose, but this will generally lower efficacy,
and thus there may be the requirement to combine
valproate with other mood stabilizers, especially when
valproate is given in lower doses. Some side effects may
be related more to chronicity of exposure rather than
to dose and thus may not be avoidable by reducing the
dose. This includes warnings for bone marrow, liver,
pancreatic, and fetal toxicities such as neural-tube
defects, as well as concerns about weight gain, metabolic
complications, and possible risk of amenorrhea and
polycystic ovaries in women of child-bearing potential. A
syndrome of menstrual disturbances, polycystic ovaries,
hyperandrogenism, obesity, and insulin resistance may be
associated with valproic acid therapy in such women.
Carbamazepine

Carbamazepine (Figure 7-79) was actually the first to
be shown to be effective in the manic phase of bipolar
disorder, but did not receive US FDA approval until
recently as a once-daily controlled-release formulation.
Although carbamazepine and valproate both act
effectively on the manic phase of bipolar disorder (Table

carbamazepine
Ca ++

7-3), they appear to have different pharmacological
mechanisms of action, including different side-effect
profiles. Thus, carbamazepine is hypothesized to act by
blocking voltage-sensitive sodium channels (VSSCs)
(Figure 7-80), perhaps at a site within the channel itself,
also known as the α subunit of VSSCs. As mentioned
earlier, VSSCs are discussed in Chapter 3 and illustrated
in Figures 3-19 through 3-21. The hypothesized action
of carbamazepine upon the α subunit of VSSCs (Figure
7-80) is different from the hypothesized actions of
valproate on these sodium channels (Figure 7-76), but
may be similar to how the anticonvulsants oxcarbazepine
and its active metabolite eslicarbazepine also act.
Although both carbamazepine and valproate are
anticonvulsants and both treat mania from above, there
are differences between these two “anticonvulsants”
beyond their presumed pharmacological mechanisms
of therapeutic action in mania. For example, valproate
is proven effective in migraine, but carbamazepine is
proven effective in neuropathic pain. Furthermore,
carbamazepine has a different side-effect profile
than valproate, including more profound immediate
suppressant effects upon the bone marrow, requiring
initial monitoring of blood counts (blood counts
including platelets should also be periodically monitored
on valproate), and notable induction of the cytochrome
P450 enzyme 3A4. Both carbamazepine and valproate are
sedating and can cause fetal toxicity such as neural-tube
defects.
Lamotrigine

K+

GABA
Na+ channel
unit
Figure 7-79 Carbamazepine. Shown here is an icon of the
pharmacological actions of carbamazepine, an anticonvulsant
used in the treatment of bipolar disorder. Carbamazepine may
work by binding to the α subunit of voltage-sensitive sodium
channels (VSSCs) and could perhaps have actions at other ion
channels for calcium and potassium. By interfering with voltagesensitive channels, carbamazepine may enhance the inhibitory
actions of γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA).

350

Lamotrigine (Figure 7-81) is approved as a “mood
stabilizer” for entirely different clinical indications
than the anticonvulsant mood stabilizers valproate and
carbamazepine, making the point that anticonvulsants
do not all have the same therapeutic actions in bipolar
disorder. Lamotrigine is not approved to treat mania
or depression in bipolar disorder, but is approved to
prevent recurrence of both mania and depression in
bipolar disorder. There are many curious things about
lamotrigine as a “mood stabilizer.” First, the US FDA
has not approved its use for acute bipolar depression,
yet most experts believe that lamotrigine is effective for
bipolar depression. A second interesting thing about
lamotrigine is that even though it has some overlapping
mechanistic actions with carbamazepine, namely binding
to the open-channel conformation of VSSCs (Figure
7-82), lamotrigine is not approved for bipolar mania.
Perhaps lamotrigine’s pharmacological actions are not
potent enough at sodium channels, or perhaps the long




<<<PAGE 368>>>

STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

titration period required when starting lamotrigine
makes it difficult to show any useful effectiveness for
mania, which generally requires treatment with drugs
that can work quickly. A third aspect of lamotrigine
is that it is generally well tolerated, with one glaring
exception: a propensity to cause rashes, including (rarely)
the life-threatening Stevens Johnson syndrome (toxic
epidermal necrolysis). Rashes caused by lamotrigine
can be minimized by very slow up-titration of the drug
during initiation of therapy, avoiding or managing drug
interactions, such as those with valproate that raise
lamotrigine levels, and by understanding how to identify
and manage serious rashes, including being able to
distinguish them from benign rashes (see discussion of
lamotrigine in Stahl’s Essential Psychopharmacology: the
Prescriber’s Guide). Finally, lamotrigine seems to have
some unique aspects to its mechanism of action (Figure
7-82), namely to reduce the release of the excitatory
neurotransmitter glutamate. It is not clear whether this
action is secondary to blocking the activation of VSSCs
(Figure 7-82) or to some additional synaptic action.
Reducing excitatory glutamatergic neurotransmission,
especially if excessive during bipolar depression, may be
a unique mechanism of action of lamotrigine and explain
why it has such a different clinical profile as a treatment
from below and a stabilizer from below for bipolar
depression.
Anticonvulsants with Uncertain or Doubtful Efficacy in
Bipolar Disorder
Oxcarbazepine/Eslicarbazepine

Oxcarbazepine is structurally related to carbamazepine,
but is not a metabolite of carbamazepine. Oxcarbazepine
is actually not the active form of the drug, but a prodrug
that is immediately converted into a 10-hydroxy
derivative, also called the monohydroxy derivative,
and most recently has been named licarbazepine. The
active form of licarbazepine is the S enantiomer, known
as eslicarbazepine. Thus, oxcarbazepine really works
via conversion to eslicarbazepine, which is itself now
available as an anticonvulsant.
Oxcarbazepine has a presumed mechanism of
anticonvulsant action the same as that for carbamazepine,
namely, binding to the open-channel conformation of the
VSSC at a site within the channel itself on the α subunit
(as in Figure 7-80). However, oxcarbazepine seems to
have some important differences from carbamazepine,
including being less sedating, having less bone marrow
toxicity, and also having less CYP450 3A4 interactions,
352

making it a more tolerable agent that is easier to dose. On
the other hand, oxcarbazepine has never been proven to
work in acute bipolar mania or depression. Nevertheless,
because of a similar postulated mechanism of action
but a better tolerability profile, oxcarbazepine and more
recently eslicarbazepine have been utilized “off-label” by
many clinicians especially for the manic phase of bipolar
disorder.
Topiramate

Topiramate is another compound approved as an
anticonvulsant and for migraine, and recently, in
combination with bupropion, for weight loss in obesity.
Topiramate has been tested in bipolar disorder, but
with ambiguous results (Table 7-3). It does seem to be
associated with weight loss and is sometimes given as an
adjunct to drugs for psychosis or to mood stabilizers that
cause weight gain, but can cause unacceptable sedation
in some patients. Topiramate is also being tested in
various substance abuse disorders, including stimulant
abuse and alcoholism. However, topiramate is not clearly
effective as a mood stabilizer, either from evidence-based
randomized controlled trials (which are not consistently
positive) or from clinical practice.
Gabapentin and Pregabalin

These anticonvulsants seem to have little or no action as
mood stabilizers, yet are robust treatments for various
pain conditions, from neuropathic pain to fibromyalgia,
and for various anxiety disorders, and are discussed in
more detail in Chapter 8 on anxiety and Chapter 9 on
pain.
Calcium Channel Blockers (L-Type)

There are several types of calcium channels, not
only the N or P/Q channels linked to secretion of
neurotransmitters, targeted by α2δ ligands and discussed
in Chapter 3 (see Figures 3-23 and 3-24), but also L
channels localized on vascular smooth muscle and
which are targeted by various antihypertensive and
antiarrhythmic drugs, commonly called “calcium channel
blockers.” L-type channels are located on neurons where
their function is still being debated, and some anecdotal
evidence suggests that calcium channel blockers,
especially dihydropyridine-type calcium channel blockers,
may be useful for some patients with bipolar disorder.
Riluzole

This agent has anticonvulsant actions in preclinical
models, but was developed to slow the progression




<<<PAGE 369>>>

Chapter 7: Treatments for Mood Disorders

of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS, or Lou Gehrig’s
disease). Theoretically, riluzole binds to VSSCs and
prevents glutamate release, in an action similar to that
postulated for lamotrigine (see Figure 7-82). The idea is
that diminishing glutamate release in ALS would prevent
the postulated excitotoxicity that may be causing death
of motor neurons in ALS. Excessive glutamate activity
may be occurring not only in ALS, but also in bipolar
depression, although this is not necessarily so severe as to
cause widespread neuronal loss.

remission of symptoms: treat from above and stabilize
from above (Figure 7-7) and treat from below and
stabilize from below (Figure 7-8).

FUTURE TREATMENTS FOR
MOOD DISORDERS
Dextromethorphan–Bupropion and
Dextromethorphan–Quinidine

As discussed above, one of the most interesting
developments in the treatment of resistant unipolar
depression in recent years has been the observation that
infusions of subanesthetic doses of ketamine or intranasal
administration of esketamine can exert an immediate
antidepressant effect and can often immediately reduce
suicidal thoughts. Since the effects are often not sustained
for more than a few days, investigators have searched for
oral ketamine-like agents that could have rapid onset,
sustained efficacy, greater ease of administration, and better
tolerability in patients with treatment-resistant illness.
Several such possibilities are in development, namely
various NMDA antagonists with additional pharmacological
properties. One agent combines the NMDA antagonist
dextromethorphan with the CYP450 2D6 inhibitor and
NDRI bupropion (also known as AXS-05), and the other

Combinations are the Standard for Treating Bipolar
Disorder

Given the disappointing number of patients who
attain satisfactory response in bipolar disorder from
monotherapy, it is more the rule than the exception
that bipolar patients receive combination treatments.
Although first-line treatment may be one of the
serotonin/dopamine agents, if this fails to adequately
control mania, another treatment for mania such as
valproate or lithium may be added (Figure 7-83). On
the other hand, if serotonin/dopamine agents fail to
adequately control depression, lamotrigine may be added
or, controversially, a monoamine reuptake inhibitor
(Figure 7-83). The goal is four treatments for fullest

Combos for Bipolar Disorder
Evidence-Based Bipolar Combos for Mania

+
5HT/DA blocker-lithium
combo

5HT/DA blocker

lithium

+
5HT/DA blockervalproate combo

valproate

5HT/DA blocker

Practice-Based Bipolar Combos for Depression

Figure 7-83 Bipolar disorder
combinations. Most patients
with bipolar disorder will require
treatment with two or more agents.
The combinations with the most
evidence for mania include addition
of a serotonin/dopamine antagonist
to either lithium or valproate.
Combinations that are not well
studied in controlled trials but that
have some practice-based evidence
for depression include a serotonin/
dopamine antagonist plus lamotrigine.
Although controversial, some clinicians
add a monoamine reuptake inhibitor to
a serotonin/dopamine antagonist for
bipolar depression.

+
5HT/DA blockerLamictal combo

Lamictal/
lamotrigine

5HT/DA blocker

Careful Combo

+
5HT/DA blockerLamictal combo

5HT/DA blocker

+
Lamictal/
lamotrigine

monoamine
reuptake
blocker

353

7




<<<PAGE 546>>>

STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Neurodegeneration in Dementia Compromises
Top-Down Inhibition: Motor Output

top-down inhibition

Figure 12-45B Neurodegeneration
in dementia compromises topdown inhibition: motor output. (1)
Accumulation of Aβ plaques and tau
tangles destroys glutamate neurons
projecting to the striatum and thus
reduces top-down cortical inhibition.
(2) GABA input into the thalamus is
insufficient and sensory input is not
adequately filtered. (3) Excessive
thalamic output directly to the cortex
and (4) via the amygdala generates a
reflexive motor response.

agitation
cortex

4

3
1

2

striatum

amygdala

+
+
+

thalamus

Up until now, treatments of agitation in AD have not
been particularly effective, including dopamine receptor
blockers already mentioned. In the absence of any
approved agents, first-line pharmacological treatment
of agitation and aggression in dementia is actually
considered by many experts to be therapy with selective
serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) and serotonin–
norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs), which can
help some patients. Second-line treatments that may help
avoid use of dopamine receptor blocking drugs include
β blockers, carbamazepine, and perhaps gabapentin and
pregabalin, but not valproate, topiramate, oxcarbazepine,
or benzodiazepines. Unfortunately, in addition to
not causing robust efficacy, many of these agents are
associated with significant side effects including sedation,
unsteady gait, diarrhea, and weakness. Carbamazepine has
perhaps shown the greatest efficacy amongst unapproved
drugs so far in treating neuropsychiatric symptoms of
dementia but has significant side-effect risks and may
interact with other medications commonly prescribed to
elderly patients. Cholinesterase inhibitors have little if any
benefit for most of the behavioral symptoms of dementia
except in patients with Lewy body dementias.
530

sensory input

Targeting Multimodal Neurotransmitters
(Norepinephrine, Serotonin, and Dopamine) for the
Symptomatic Treatment of Agitation in Alzheimer
Disease

Brexpiprazole is a serotonin–dopamine–norepinephrine
antagonist/partial agonist discussed in Chapter 5 as
one of the drugs approved to treat psychosis (Figure
5-57) and in Chapter 7 as one of the drugs to augment
SSRIs/SNRI to treat unipolar major depression. This
agent combines several simultaneous mechanisms to
quell the excessive activity of the agitation network in
AD: namely by its well-known dopamine D2 partial
agonist actions combined with 5HT1A partial agonist
and 5HT2A antagonist actions, as well as by its relatively
unique additional actions blocking both α1- and α2adrenergic receptors (Figure 5-57 and Figure 12-47).
Despite brexpiprazole having a warning for increased
mortality in dementia-related psychosis, using this
agent for agitation in AD and in doses lower than those
generally used to treat psychosis in schizophrenia may
provide a greater safety margin, especially since it is
the hypothetical synergy of its five actions that leads to
therapeutic efficacy in agitation of AD (Figure 12-47).




<<<PAGE 638>>>

Index

sertraline, 294, 378
setiptiline, 309
shift work disorder, 435, 436, 444
sigma-1 binding, 294, 295
signal propagation, 74
signal transduction cascades, 9–23, 28,
53
four important types of, 11, 12
second messenger, forming, 11–14
second messenger, to phosphoprotein
cascades, 15–18
second messenger, to phosphoprotein
messenger, 13–15
time course, 11
silent antagonists, 41, 42, 45, 192
Sinclair method, 573
SLC1 gene family, 31, 35
SLC17 gene family, 31, 35
SLC18 gene family, 31, 35
SLC32 gene family, 31, 35
SLC6 gene family, 30, 31–5
sleep
neurobiology of, 402–15
purpose of, 414–15
REM and non-REM, 413, 414, 435
sleepiness, 430–4
sleep/wake cycle, 412–13
disturbance of, 414, 416
small interfering RNA (siRNA), 27
small nuclear RNA (snRNA), 27
smoking, 476, See also nicotine
cessation, 306, 573
snare proteins, 73
SNRIs (serotonin–norepinephrine
reuptake inhibitors), 298–303
α2δ ligand combinations, 399
anxiety disorders, 368
arousal combo, 333
mirtazapine combination, 333
pain treatment, 380
triple action combo, 333
social anxiety disorder, 362, 372, 377
sodium oxybate, 446–8
sodium potassium ATPase (sodium
pump), 32, 33
sodium valproate, 347–50
solriamfetol, 444
soma, 2
somatic pain, 302
somatosensory cortex, 380
specific neutral amino acid transporters
(SNATs), 96
spinobulbar tracts, 380
spinothalamic tract, 380
SSRIs (selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitors), 289–96
anxiety disorders, 368

622

clinical uses of, 289
common features of six drugs, 289–92
depression in dementia, 534
OCD, 577
triple-action combo, 333
unique properties of six drugs, 292–3
stabilizers. See partial agonists
steroids, neuroactive, 320–5
Stevens Johnson syndrome, 352
stigma, 145
stimulants, 467–79, 544–7
atypical, 546
slow release vs. fast release, 478–9
targeting DATs, 473–8
treatment of addiction, 547
stimulus-response conditioning, 571
strengthening, synapse, 151, 154
stress, ADHD, 467, 469, 480
stroke, 492, 524
Stroop test, 450, 451
subjective memory complaints, 487, 488
sublingual formulation, 232
substance addictions, 544–75
substrates, 45, 46
suicide, 145, 156
clozapine treatment, 223
depressed patients, 251
mixed feature patients, 251
prevention, 346
suicide inhibitors, 46
sulpiride, 202, 205
supersensitivity, 170, 171
suprachiasmatic nucleus, 275, 307
suprasegmental central sensitization,
384, 390
suvorexant, 423
synapses, 1, 3
enlarged, 5
synaptic neurotransmission, 4
synaptogenesis, 151, 154
tardive dyskinesia (TD), 166
pathophysiology, 170–4
treatment, 174–81
tasimelteon, 439
tau protein, 488, 494, 502, 503
tetrabenazine, 175–6
tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), 563, 565,
567
tetrameric ligand-gated ion channels,
54–5
thalamic dopamine pathway, 85
thalamo-cortical glutamate pathway, 104
third-messenger kinase, 14, 16
third-messenger phosphatase, 15, 16
thyroid, 333
tonic inhibition, 259, 263

topiramate, 201, 352, 556, 575
trace amines, 241–38
tradozone, 311–15, 424–5
transduction, 381
transfer RNA (tRNA), 27
transporters, 29–35, 50
classification and structure, 29–31
histamine and neuropeptides, 35
monoamine, 30, 31–4, 208
SLC1 gene family, 31
vesicular, 32, 35
tranylcypromine, 337
traumatic memories, 356, 366, 375, 574
trazodone, 535
treatment responsiveness, 155
tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs), 333–7
triglyceride levels, 197, 198, 199
tryptophan, 114
tuberoinfundibular dopamine pathway,
85
tuberomammillary nucleus, 406, 408
type 2 diabetes, 415
tyramine, 338
tyrosine, 80, 252
tyrosine hydroxylase, 253
ultradian sleep cycle, 413–16
unipolar depression, 34, 244
augmenting strategies for, 325–35
drugs for, 289–325
monoamine reuptake blockers, 285–8
or bipolar, 249–51
second-line monotherapies, 333–8
treatment resistance in, 323–38
valbenazine, 177
valproic acid (valproate), 347–50
varenicline, 551, 552, 573
vascular dementia, 491–2, 534
VEGF (vascular endothelial growth
factor), 329
venlafaxine, 299, 302
ventromedial prefrontal cortex, 372, 374
vesicular transporter for glutamate, 99
vesicular transporters, 31, 32, 35
VIAATs (vesicular inhibitory amino acid
transporters), 255
vilazodone, 296–9
viloxazine, 485
violence, 145–7, 575, 577–8
visual hallucinations, 113, 524
vital sign, 381, 399, 401
VMAT1, 174
VMAT2 inhibition, 174–81
VMAT2 transporter, 31, 81, 254
VMATs (vesicular monoamine
transporters), 35


