<<<PAGE 351>>>

Chapter 7: Treatments for Mood Disorders

Arousal Combos
SNRI + stimulant
= SNRI

5HT

NE

DA

single boost

double boost

single boost

= stimulant

SERT

NET

SNRI

SNRI

A

DAT
stimulant

stimulant

SNRI + modafinil
= SNRI

5HT

NE

DA

single boost

single boost

single boost

= modafinil

SERT
B

NET
SNRI

SNRI

DAT

7

modafinil

Figure 7-66 Arousal combo: SNRI plus stimulant/modafinil. (A) Serotonin (5HT) and dopamine (DA) are single-boosted and
norepinephrine (NE) is double-boosted when a serotonin–norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor (SNRI) is combined with a stimulant. (B)
Serotonin (5HT) and norepinephrine (NE) are single-boosted by the serotonin–norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor (SNRI) while dopamine
(DA) is single-boosted by modafinil.

Table 7-2 Some tricyclic antidepressants still in use

Generic name

Trade name

Clomipramine

Anafranil

Imipramine

Tofranil

Amitriptyline

Elavil; Endep; Tryptizol;
Laroxyl

Nortriptyline

Pamelor; Aventyl

Protriptyline

Vivactil

Maprotiline

Ludiomil

Amoxapine

Asendin

Doxepin

Sinequan; Adapin

Desipramine

Norpramin; Pertofran

Trimipramine

Surmontil

Dothiepin

Prothiaden

Lofepramine

Deprimyl; Gamanil

Tianeptine

Coaxil; Stablon

structure contains three rings. The TCAs were
synthesized about the same time that other threeringed phenothiazine molecules were shown to be
effective tranquilizers for schizophrenia (i.e., the early
D2 antagonist drugs such as chlorpromazine) but were
a disappointment when tested as drugs for psychosis.
However, during testing for schizophrenia, they were
serendipitously discovered to be effective in unipolar
depression. Tricyclic antidepressants are not merely drugs
for depression since one of them (clomipramine) has
anti-obsessive–compulsive disorder; many of them have
anti-panic effects at antidepressant doses and efficacy for
neuropathic and low back pain at low doses.
Long after their antidepressant properties were
observed, the TCAs were discovered to block the reuptake
pumps for norepinephrine (i.e., NET), or for both
norepinephrine and serotonin (i.e., SERT) (see Figure
7-67A). Some tricyclics have equal or greater potency for
SERT inhibition (e.g., clomipramine); others are more
selective for NET inhibition (e.g., desipramine, maprotiline,
335




<<<PAGE 416>>>

STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

improvement in relieving pain. Each class of drug may
also help different ancillary symptoms in fibromyalgia,
so the combination of α2δ ligands with SNRIs may lead to
broader symptom relief than using either alone, although
both are effective for pain in fibromyalgia. That is, α2δ
ligands may reduce symptoms of anxiety in fibromyalgia
(see discussion of α2δ ligands in anxiety in Chapter 8 and
illustrated in Figures 8-17C and 8-18C) and for improving
the slow-wave sleep disorder of fibromyalgia (sleep
disorders and their treatment are discussed in further
detail in Chapter 10). SNRIs can be useful in reducing
symptoms of depression and anxiety in fibromyalgia
(see Chapter 7 on treatment for mood disorders) and
for treating fatigue as well as the cognitive symptoms
associated with fibromyalgia, sometimes also called fibrofog (see Figures 9-8 and 9-9). Problems with executive
functioning in a wide variety of clinical conditions are
generally linked to inefficient information processing
in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) where
dopamine neurotransmission is important in regulating
brain circuits (see Chapter 4 on cognition in schizophrenia
and Figure 4-17). This concept of dopaminergic
regulation of cognition in the DLPFC and the role of
boosting dopamine neurotransmission to improve
executive dysfunction is also discussed in Chapter 11
on attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. Since SNRIs
increase dopamine concentrations in the DLPFC (see
Figure 7-33C), SNRI agents can also potentially improve
symptoms of fibro-fog in fibromyalgia patients. This
may be particularly so for the SNRIs milnacipran and
levomilnacipran, which have potent norepinephrine
reuptake binding properties at all clinically effective doses
(Figures 7-30 and 7-31), or for higher doses of the SNRIs
duloxetine (Figure 7-29), venlafaxine, and desvenlafaxine
(Figure 7-28), which act to increase norepinephrine
reuptake blocking properties of these agents and thus act
to increase concentrations of dopamine in the DLPFC
(Figure 7-33C). Other strategies for improving fibro-fog
in fibromyalgia patients include the same ones used to
treat cognitive dysfunction in depression, and include
modafinil, armodafinil, selective norepinephrine reuptake
inhibitors (NRIs) such as atomoxetine, norepinephrine–
dopamine reuptake inhibitors (NDRIs) such as bupropion,
and with caution, stimulants. SNRIs, sometimes
augmented with modafinil, stimulants, or bupropion can
also be useful for symptoms of physical fatigue as well as
mental fatigue in fibromyalgia patients.
Second-line treatments for pain in fibromyalgia
can include sedating drugs for depression including

400

mirtazapine and tricyclic antidepressants, as well as
the tricyclic muscle relaxant cyclobenzapine. Other
sleep aids such as benzodiazepines, hypnotics, and
trazodone can be helpful in relieving sleep disturbance
in fibromyalgia. Evidence is also accumulating for the
efficacy of γ-hydroxybutyrate (GHB or sodium oxybate)
in fibromyalgia (use with extreme caution because of
diversion and abuse potential). GHB is approved for
narcolepsy, enhances slow-wave sleep, and is discussed
in Chapter 10 on sleep (see Figures 10-67 and 10-68). In
heroic cases the use of GHB by experts for the treatment
of severe and treatment-resistant cases of fibromyalgia
may be justified. A number of anticonvulsants other than
the α2δ ligands (Figure 9-16) are also used second-line for
chronic neuropathic pain states, including fibromyalgia.
These agents are thought to target voltage-gated sodium
channels rather than voltage-gated calcium channels
and thus seem to have a different mechanism of action
than α2δ ligands and may be effective in patients with
inadequate response to α2δ ligands.

SUMMARY
This chapter has defined pain, and has explained
the processing of nociceptive neuronal activity into
the perception of pain by pathways that lead to the
spinal cord, and then up the spinal cord to the brain.
Neuropathic pain is discussed extensively, including
both peripheral and central mechanisms, and the
concept of central sensitization. The key role of
descending inhibitory pathways that reduce the activity
of nociceptive pain neurons with the release of serotonin
and norepinephrine is explained, and shown to be
the basis for the actions of serotonin–norepinephrine
reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs) as agents that reduce the
perception of pain in conditions ranging from major
depression to fibromyalgia to diabetic peripheral
neuropathic pain, low back pain, osteoarthritis, and
related conditions. The critical role of voltage-sensitive
calcium channels (VSCCs) is also explained, providing
the basis for the actions of α2δ ligands as agents that
also reduce the perception of pain in diabetic peripheral
neuropathic pain, fibromyalgia, painful physical
symptoms of depression and anxiety disorders, shingles,
and other neuropathic pain conditions. Finally, the
spectrum of conditions from affective disorders to
chronic neuropathic pain disorders is introduced, with
emphasis on the condition of fibromyalgia and its newly
evolving psychopharmacological treatments.




<<<PAGE 417>>>

10

Disorders of Sleep and
Wakefulness and Their
Treatment: Neurotransmitter
Networks for Histamine
and Orexin

Neurobiology of Sleep and Wakefulness 402
The Arousal Spectrum 402
Histamine 402
Orexins/Hypocretins 406
Pathways of Arousal and Sleep for the Sleep/Wake
Cycle 408
Ultradian Cycles 413
Neurotransmitters and the Ultradian Sleep
Cycle 414
Why Do We Sleep? Can’t I Sleep When I Die? 414
Insomnia 418
What Is Insomnia? 418
Diagnosis and Comorbidities 418
Treating Insomnia: Drugs with Hypnotic
Actions 421
Benzodiazepines (GABAA Positive Allosteric
Modulators) 421
Z Drugs (GABAA Positive Allosteric Modulators) 422
Dual Orexin Receptor Antagonists (DORAs) 423

This chapter will provide a brief overview of the
psychopharmacology of disorders of sleep and wakefulness.
Included here are short discussions of the symptoms,
diagnostic criteria, and treatments for disorders that cause
insomnia, excessive daytime sleepiness, or both. Clinical
descriptions and formal criteria for how to diagnose sleep
disorders are mentioned here only in passing. The reader
should consult standard reference sources for this material.
The discussion here will emphasize the links between
various brain circuits and their neurotransmitters with
disorders that cause insomnia or sleepiness. The goal of
this chapter is to acquaint the reader with ideas about the
clinical and biological aspects of sleep and wakefulness,
how various disorders can alter sleep and wakefulness, and
how many new and evolving treatments can resolve the
symptoms of insomnia and sleepiness.
The detection, assessment, and treatment of sleep/
wake disorders are rapidly becoming standardized parts of
a psychiatric evaluation. Modern psychopharmacologists
increasingly consider sleep to be a psychiatric “vital

Serotonergic Hypnotics 424
Histamine 1 Antagonists as Hypnotics 425
Anticonvulsants as Hypnotics 426
Hypnotic Actions and Pharmacokinetics: Your Sleep
Is at the Mercy of Your Drug Levels! 426
Behavioral Treatments of Insomnia 430
Excessive Daytime Sleepiness 430
What Is Sleepiness? 430
Causes of Hypersomnia 431
Circadian Rhythm Disorders 435
Wake-Promoting Agents and Treatment of
Excessive Daytime Sleepiness 440
Caffeine 440
Amphetamine and Methylphenidate 441
Modafinil/Armodafinil 442
Solriamfetol, a Wake-Promoting NDRI 444
Pitolisant, H3 Presynaptic Antagonist 444
Sodium Oxybate and Narcolepsy/Cataplexy 446
Summary 448

sign,” thus requiring routine evaluation and symptomatic
treatment whenever encountered. This is similar to
the earlier discussion in Chapter 9, where pain is also
increasingly being considered as another psychiatric
“vital sign.” That is, disorders of sleep (and pain) are so
important, so pervasive, and cut across so many psychiatric
conditions that the elimination of these symptoms – no
matter what psychiatric disorder may be present – is
increasingly recognized as necessary in order to achieve
full symptomatic and functional remission for the patient.
Many of the treatments discussed in this chapter
are covered in previous chapters. For details of
mechanisms of insomnia treatments that are also used
for the treatment of depression, the reader is referred
to Chapter 7; for those insomnia treatments that are
benzodiazepines, the reader is also referred to Chapter
7. For various hypersomnia treatments, especially
stimulants, the reader is referred to Chapter 11 on
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and to
Chapter 13 on impulsivity, compulsivity, and addiction
401




<<<PAGE 455>>>

Chapter 10: Disorders of Sleep and Wakefulness and Their Treatment

treatment of mood disorders or adjunctively to modafinil/
armodafinil for shift work disorder.
Morning light and evening melatonin can help
depression, delayed sleep phase disorder, and shift work
disorder. On the other hand, early evening light and
early morning melatonin can help advanced sleep phase
disorder. Non-24-hour sleep–wake disorder benefits from
synchronization of circadian rhythms by the powerful
melatonergic agent tasimelteon (Figure 10-57). These
various circadian treatments can also be beneficial in
resetting the biological clock in normal elderly people
(morning melatonin and evening light) and normal teens
(morning light and evening melatonin). Parents have
long recognized the benefits of letting in early morning
sunlight by opening the shades to get hibernating teens
up and going in time for school.
Melatonergic Hypnotics

Melatonin is the neurotransmitter secreted by the pineal
gland, and acts especially in the suprachiasmatic nucleus
to regulate circadian rhythms (discussed in Chapter 6
and illustrated in Figures 6-34 to 6-36). Melatonin shifts
circadian rhythms, especially in those with phase delay
when taken at the desired appropriate bedtime, not only

for depressed patients, those who have delayed phase sleep
disorder, and many normal teenagers, but also for many
experiencing jet lag from travel-induced shifts in circadian
rhythms. In all cases, melatonin can facilitate sleep onset.
Melatonin acts at three different sites, not only
melatonin 1 (MT1) and melatonin 2 (MT2) receptors, but
also at a third site, sometimes called the melatonin 3 site,
which is now known to be the enzyme NRH–quinone
oxidoreductase 2, and which is probably not involved in
sleep physiology (Figure 10-57). MT1-mediated inhibition
of neurons in the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) could
help to promote sleep by decreasing the wake-promoting
actions of the circadian “clock” or “pacemaker” that
functions there, perhaps by attenuating the SCN’s alerting
signals, allowing sleep signals to predominate, and thus
inducing sleep. Phase shifting and circadian rhythm
effects of the normal sleep/wake cycle are thought to
be primarily mediated by MT2 receptors, which entrain
these signals in the SCN.
Ramelteon is a MT1/MT2 agonist marketed for
insomnia, and tasimelteon, another MT1/MT2 agonist,
is marketed for non-24-hour sleep–wake disorder
(Figure 10-57). These agents improve sleep onset,
sometimes better when used for several days in a row.

Melatonergic Agents

ramelteon
tasimelteon

melatonin
MT3

MT1

MT2

MT1

5HT2B

5HT2C

agomelatine

MT1

MT2

Figure 10-57 Melatonergic
agents. Endogenous melatonin is
secreted by the pineal gland and
mainly acts in the suprachiasmatic
nucleus to regulate circadian
rhythms. There are three types
of receptors for melatonin: MT1
and MT2, which are both involved
in sleep, and MT3, which is
actually the enzyme NRH–quinine
oxidoreductase 2 and not thought
to be involved in sleep physiology.
There are several different agents
that act at melatonin receptors.
Melatonin itself, available over
the counter, acts at MT1 and MT2
receptors as well as at the MT3 site.
Both ramelteon and tasimelteon
are MT1 and MT2 receptor agonists
and seem to provide sleep onset
though not necessarily sleep
maintenance. Agomelatine is
not only a MT1 and MT2 receptor
agonist, but is also a serotonin
5HT2C and 5HT2B receptor
antagonist and is available as an
antidepressant outside the US.

MT2

439

10




<<<PAGE 456>>>

STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

They are not known to help sleep maintenance, but will
induce natural sleep in those subjects who suffer mostly
from initial insomnia. The actions of tasimelteon at MT2
receptors are thought to underlie its effectiveness at
retraining the circadian clock.

WAKE-PROMOTING AGENTS
AND TREATMENT OF EXCESSIVE
DAYTIME SLEEPINESS
Why treat sleepiness? If the most common cause of
sleepiness is sleep deprivation can’t we treat sleepiness
with sleep and not with drugs? The short answer is
unfortunately not. Here we will discuss the treatment
of excessive daytime sleepiness with various wakepromoting agents such as caffeine, stimulants, modafinil/
armodafinil, and others, as well as some newer agents,
including an NDRI (norepinephrine–dopamine reuptake
inhibitor) and an H3 antagonist. Non-pharmacological
treatments are also presented.
If disorders characterized by excessive daytime
sleepiness can be conceptualized as deficient daytime
arousal (Figure 10-44), then wake-promoting treatments
can be seen as agents that increase brain activation and
arousal (Figure 10-58). There are a number of ways to do
this, but most involve enhancing the release of wakepromoting neurotransmitters, especially dopamine and
histamine.

Caffeine

Caffeine is the world’s most widely consumed
psychoactive drug. How does it work? The answer is that
it is an antagonist of the neurotransmitter adenosine
(Figure 10-59). Adenosine was first mentioned in
this chapter as the chemical known to be linked to
the homeostatic sleep drive (illustrated in Figure 1018). Since adenosine accumulates as you get tired, it
essentially is taking account of your homeostatic drive
and some say that adenosine acts as the “accountant” or
“bean counter” of fatigue, documenting and quantitating
the homeostatic drive for sleep. Interestingly, one way
to make a deposit into this homeostatic account to
reduce this drive and diminish fatigue is with a coffee
bean! That is, caffeine, from coffee or other sources, is
wake-promoting, reduces fatigue, and diminishes the
homeostatic sleep drive. How does it do this? Caffeine is
an antagonist of adenosine and thus can block some of
the effects of adenosine buildup, both molecularly and
behaviorally (Figure 10-59).
Native dopamine 2 (D2) receptors bind dopamine
with high affinity (Figure 10-59A) but in the presence of
adenosine, D2 receptors can couple (i.e., heterodimerize)
with adenosine receptors, reducing the affinity of the D2
receptor for dopamine (Figure 10-59B). However, caffeine
blocks adenosine binding to the adenosine receptor and
restores the affinity of the D2 receptor for dopamine even

Promoting Wakefulness
To Promote Wakefulness
awake
alert
creative
problem solving

Inhibit
GABA
Enhance
hypocretin/orexin
acetylcholine
dopamine
norepinephrine
serotonin
histamine

excessive daytime
sleepiness

deficient arousal

440

excessive arousal

Figure 10-58 Promoting
wakefulness. To treat excessive
daytime sleepiness, one can administer
medications that promote arousal by
enhancing neurotransmission involved
in wakefulness; most notably, by
enhancing dopamine and histamine
neurotransmission.




<<<PAGE 458>>>

STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Amphetamine and Methylphenidate
amphetamine
methylphenidate

Figure 10-60 Amphetamine and methylphenidate. Amphetamine and methylphenidate are both norepinephrine (left) and dopamine
(right) reuptake inhibitors; amphetamine has the additional property of inhibition of the vesicular monoamine transporter 2 (VMAT2),
which can lead to dopamine release. Enhancing these neurotransmitters in sleep/wake circuitry (far right) can be wake-promoting and
fatigue-reducing; thus, they are both approved for excessive daytime sleepiness in narcolepsy and used off-label in other conditions
associated with hypersomnia.

are now available for the treatment of ADHD and are
reviewed in detail in Chapter 11 (see Figures 11-9, 11-10,
11-33, 11-35, and 11-36) and in Chapter 13 on substance
abuse (see Figure 13-8).
Amphetamine and methylphenidate can be dosed to
treat sleepiness in narcolepsy in order to enhance the
synaptic availability of the wake-promoting and arousal
neurotransmitters dopamine and norepinephrine and
thereby improve wakefulness in narcolepsy without
causing significant reinforcement (Figure 10-60).
Nevertheless, amphetamine and methylphenidate
are controlled substances because of high abuse and
diversion potential, as well as the possibility of inducing
psychosis, mania, high blood pressure, and other side
effects, especially at doses higher than those used to treat
sleepiness or ADHD (discussed in Chapters 11 and 13).
However, they are highly effective agents to promote
wakefulness in narcolepsy.
Modafinil/Armodafinil
Mechanism of Action

Racemic modafinil and its R enantiomer armodafinil
(Figure 10-61) are wake-promoting agents not only
442

approved for the treatment of narcolepsy, but also as
adjunctive treatments for obstructive sleep apnea and
for shift work disorder. These agents are thought to act
predominantly as inhibitors of the dopamine transporter
(DAT) or dopamine (DA) reuptake pump (Figure
10-62). Although modafinil is a weak DAT inhibitor,
the concentrations of the drug achieved after oral
dosing are quite high, and sufficient to have substantial
actions on DATs. In fact, the pharmacokinetics of
modafinil suggest that this drug acts via a slow rise in
plasma levels, sustained plasma levels for 6–8 hours,
and incomplete occupancy of DAT, all properties that
could be ideal for enhancing tonic dopamine activity
to promote wakefulness (Figure 10-63) rather than
phasic dopamine activity to promote reinforcement
and abuse (see Chapter 11 on ADHD and Figures 11-9,
11-10, 11-33, 11-35, and 11-36 as well as Chapter 13 on
substance abuse and Figure 13-8). Once dopamine release
is activated by modafinil, and the cortex is aroused, this
can apparently lead to downstream release of histamine
from the tuberomammillary nucleus (TMN) and then
further activation of the lateral hypothalamus with
orexin release to stabilize wakefulness (Figure 10-63).




<<<PAGE 459>>>

Chapter 10: Disorders of Sleep and Wakefulness and Their Treatment

Figure 10-61 Modafinil and
armodafinil. Modafinil consists of two
enantiomers, R and S; the R enantiomer
has been developed and marketed
as armodafinil. Both modafinil
and armodafinil are thought to act
predominantly as inhibitors of the
dopamine transporter (DAT).

T
DA

TA
D

R modafinil

However, the activation of the lateral hypothalamus
and release of orexin do not appear to be necessary for
the action of modafinil, since modafinil still promotes
wakefulness in patients who have loss of hypothalamic
orexin neurons in narcolepsy. The activation of TMN
and lateral hypothalamic neurons may be secondary and
downstream actions resulting from modafinil’s effects on
dopamine neurons.
A related wake-promoting agent is the R enantiomer
of modafinil, called armodafinil (Figure 10-61).
Armodafinil has a later time to peak levels, a longer
half-life, and higher plasma drug levels 6–14 hours
after oral administration than racemic modafinil.
The pharmacokinetic properties of armodafinil could
theoretically improve the clinical profile of modafinil,
with greater activation of phasic dopamine firing,
possibly eliminating the need for a second daily dose, as
is often required with racemic modafinil.
Narcolepsy

Modafinil/armodafinil are effective treatments of
sleepiness in narcolepsy, although possibly not as
powerful as amphetamine and methylphenidate.
However, head-to-head trials have not been conducted.
Furthermore, the abuse potential of modafinil/
armodafinil is much reduced compared to amphetamine
and methylphenidate, and the side effects are not as
severe. In addition, both modafinil and armodafinil
are approved for treatment of two additional disorders

S modafinil

for which amphetamine and methylphenidate are
not approved, namely, for shift work disorder and as
adjunctive treatment for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA).
Obstructive Sleep Apnea

First-line treatment for OSA (Figure 10-49) is continuous
positive airway pressure (CPAP) (Figure 10-64). Although
CPAP treatment is quite effective and has been shown
to reduce hospitalization rates and healthcare costs,
adherence rates are poor (54%). For patients who find
CPAP intolerable, there are other treatment options that
may be considered, including bilevel positive airway
pressure (BPAP), auto-titrating positive airway pressure
(APAP), oral appliances designed to stabilize the jaw
and/or tongue during sleep, and various surgeries aimed
at correcting physical attributes that may contribute to
OSA. Additionally, several behavioral interventions may
be useful for ameliorating OSA; these include weight
loss (to a BMI <25), exercise, the avoidance of alcohol
and sedatives at bedtime, and positional therapy (i.e.,
the use of a backpack or other object that prevents the
patient from sleeping on their back). Modafinil and
armodafinil are approved specifically as adjuncts to
standard treatment of underlying airway obstruction,
which is frequently inadequate to treat the hypersomnia
associated with OSA. Given the low adherence rates to
CPAP, modafinil/armodafinil are sometimes used “offlabel” for OSA as monotherapies for patients who do not
tolerate CPAP.
443

10




<<<PAGE 460>>>

STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Mechanism of Action of
Modafinil/Armodafinil

DA reuptake
pump

modafinil

DA

when needing to function during the daytime when
sleepy. Exposure to light alters circadian rhythms and
suppresses melatonin release. Treatment with 10,000
lux, bright, blue light for 30 minutes a day may be used
to reset circadian rhythms (Figure 10-56). Importantly,
the administration of bright light therapy must be
appropriately timed in accordance with the patient’s
circadian phase of melatonin secretion, with light
administration occurring approximately 8 hours after
evening melatonin secretion (possibly amplified by
oral dosing with a melatonin agent, Figure 10-57) or
in accordance with a predetermined bright light phase
response curve. One form of bright light therapy, dawn
simulation therapy, applies a slow, incremental light
signal at the end of the sleep cycle. Data show that
performance, alertness, and mood during the night shift
can be improved in shift workers using bright light reentrainment of circadian rhythms.
Solriamfetol, a Wake-Promoting NDRI

+
+
+
+
increase in tonic firing,
downstream increase in HA
and activation of wake-related
circuits
Figure 10-62 Mechanism of action of modafinil/
armodafinil. Modafinil and armodafinil bind with weak affinity
for the dopamine transporter (DAT); however, their plasma
levels are high and this compensates for the low binding.
Increased synaptic dopamine (DA) following blockade of DAT
leads to increased tonic firing and downstream effects on
neurotransmitters involved in wakefulness, including histamine
(HA) and orexin/hypocretin.

Shift Work Disorder

Shift work disorder (Figure 10-51) can be tricky to
treat, especially if the patient has an ever-evolving and
unstable shift work schedule. Suffice it to say, shift
workers are frequently sleepy, but still must work,
drive, and function. Modafinil/armodafinil can make
a big difference in an individual’s ability to function
with alertness when suffering from shift work disorder.
Supplementing modafinil/armodafinil with circadian
rhythm adjunctive therapy is often helpful (Figure
10-55). This includes trying to reset the biological
clock with morning light (Figure 10-56), especially
444

Solriamfetol is a recently approved agent for daytime
sleepiness, both in patients with narcolepsy and as an
adjunct to mechanical treatments for airway obstruction
in patients with OSA. It works by norepinephrine and
dopamine reuptake inhibition (see Chapter 7 and Figures
7-34 through 7-36), and seems to be more potent than
bupropion in this aspect, and less potent but more tolerable
and less abusable than amphetamines or methylphenidate.
Its short half-life is consistent with morning dosing wearing
off in time for sleep.
Pitolisant, H3 Presynaptic Antagonist

Pitolisant (Figure 10-65) is a drug with a novel
mechanism for improving wakefulness in narcolepsy
by blocking the normal action of presynaptic H3
autoreceptors (Figure 10-66A,B) to inhibit histamine
release. Inhibiting the presynaptic H3 receptor causes
the disinhibition (that is, the release) of presynaptic
histamine (Figure 10-66C), and this is wake-promoting.
Pitolisant, a presynaptic H3 autoreceptor antagonist
(Figures 10-65 and 10-66C), is approved for the treatment
of narcolepsy, and there are anecdotal observations that
it may be effective in cataplexy as well. Pitolisant is not a
controlled substance and has no known abuse potential
and is in testing for improving excessive daytime
sleepiness in OSA. Pitolisant can be overly activating,
causing anxiety or insomnia. Studies suggest it may
be about as effective as modafinil but perhaps not as
effective as amphetamine/methylphenidate for improving
excessive daytime sleepiness.




<<<PAGE 461>>>

Chapter 10: Disorders of Sleep and Wakefulness and Their Treatment

Figure 10-63 Modafinil/armodafinil
in wake circuits. Blockade of the
dopamine transporter (DAT) by
modafinil/armodafinil leads to
increased tonic dopaminergic
firing and downstream effects on
wake-promoting neurotransmitters.
Specifically, cortical release of
wake-promoting neurotransmitters is
increased, which leads to downstream
release of histamine from the
tuberomammillary nucleus (TMN)
and further activation of the lateral
hypothalamus (LH), with corresponding
orexin release that stabilizes
wakefulness.

Modafinil/Armodafinil

thalamus
basal
forebrain
VLPO

LH

PPT/
LDT

VTA

TMN
RN

LC

GABA
hypocretin/orexin
acetylcholine

modafinil/armodafinil

dopamine
norepinephrine
histamine

Treating Obstructive Sleep Apnea
Oral Appliances
CPAP
nosemask

airflow

Figure 10-64 Treating obstructive
sleep apnea. First-line treatment
for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is
continuous positive airway pressure
(CPAP). Other treatment options
are also available, including oral
appliances and surgical interventions.
Medications can be used as adjuncts
to treat excessive daytime sleepiness
associated with OSA.

expiratory
resistance

10
Surgical Intervention

mouth is
unobstructed

445




<<<PAGE 610>>>

Suggested Reading and Selected References

Wake Disorders/Sleepiness/OSA/
Narcolepsy/Circadian/Shift Work

Carocci A, Catalano A, Sinicropi MS (2014) Melatonergic
drugs in development. Clin Pharmacol Adv Applications 6:
127–37.

Abad VC, Guilleminault C (2011) Pharmacological treatment
of obstructive sleep apnea. Curr Pharm Design 17: 1418–25.

Cauter EV, Plat L, Scharf MB, et al. (1997) Simultaneous
stimulation of slow-wave sleep and growth hormone
secretion by gamma-hydroxybutyrate in normal young
men. J Clin Invest 100: 745–53.

Adenuga O, Attarian H (2014) Treatment of disorders of
hypersomnolence. Curr Treat Options Neurol 16: 302.
Ahmed I, Thorpy M (2010) Clinical features, diagnosis and
treatment of narcolepsy. Clin Chest Med 31: 371–81.
Aloia MS, Arnedt JT, Davis JD, Riggs RL, Byrd D (2004)
Neuropsychological sequelae of obstructive sleep apnea–
hypopnea syndrome: a critical review. J Int Neuropsychol
Soc 10: 772–85.
Arallanes-Licea E, Caldelas I, De Ita-Perez D, et al. (2014)
The circadian timing system: a recent addition in the
physiological mechanisms underlying pathological and
aging processes. Aging Dis 5: 406–18.
Artioli P, Lorenzi C, Priovano A, et al. (2007) How do
genes exert their role? Period 3 gene variants and
possible influences on mood disorder phenotypes. Eur
Neuropsychopharmacol 17: 587–94.
Aurora RN, Chowdhuri S, Ramar K, et al. (2012) The
treatment of central sleep apnea syndromes in adults:
practice parameters with an evidence-based literature
review and meta-analyses. Sleep 35: 17–40.
Banerjee S, Wang Y, Solt LA, et al. (2014) Pharmacological
targeting of the mammalian clock regulates sleep
architecture and emotional behaviour. Nat Commun 5: 5759.
Barger LK, Ogeil RP, Drake CL, et al. (2012) Validation of a
questionnaire to screen for shift work disorder. Sleep 35:
1693–703.
Benedetti F, Serretti A, Colombo C, et al. (2003) Influence
of CLOCK gene polymorphisms on circadian mood
fluctuation and illness recurrence in bipolar depression.
Am J Med Genet B, Neuropsychiatr Genet 123 : 23–6.
Black JE, Hull SG, Tiller J, et al. (2010) The long-term
tolerability and efficacy of armodafinil in patients with
excessive sleepiness associated with treated obstructive
sleep apnea, shift work disorder, or narcolepsy: an openlabel extension study. J Clin Sleep Med 6: 458–66.
Bogan RK (2010) Armodafinil in the treatment of excessive
sleepiness. Expert Opin Pharmacother 11: 993–1002.
Bonacci JM, Venci JV, Ghandi MA (2015) Tasimelteon
(HetliozTM): a new melatonin receptor agonist for the
treatment of non-24 sleep-wake disorder. J Pharm Pract
28: 473–8.
Brancaccio M, Enoki R, Mazuki CN, et al. (2014) Networkmediated encoding of circadian time: the suprachiasmatic
nucleus (SCN) from genes to neurons to circuits, and back.
J Neurosci 34: 15192–9.

594

Cermakian N, Lange T, Golombek D, et al. (2013) Crosstalk
between the circadian clock circuitry and the immune
system. Chronobiol Int 30: 870–88.
Cirelli C (2009) The genetic and molecular regulation of sleep:
from fruit flies to humans. Nat Rev Neurosci 10: 549–60.
Colwell CS (2011) Linking neural activity and molecular
oscillators in the SCN. Nat Rev Neurosci 12: 553–69.
Cook H et al. (2003) A 12-month, open-label, multicenter
extension trial of orally administered sodium oxybate for
the treatment of narcolepsy. Sleep 26: 31–5.
Crowley SJ, Lee C, Tseng CY, et al. (2004) Complete or partial
circadian re-entrainment improves performance, alertness,
and mood during night-shift work. Sleep 27: 1077–87.
Czeisler CA, Walsh JK, Roth T, et al. (2005) Modafinil for
excessive sleepiness associated with shift-work sleep
disorder. New Engl J Med 353: 476–86.
Dallaspezia S, Benedetti F (2011) Chronobiological therapy for
mood disorders. Expert Rev Neurother 11: 961–70.
Darwish M, Bond M, Ezzet F (2012) Armodafinil in patients
with excessive sleepiness associated with shift work
disorder: a pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic model
for predicting and comparing their concentration-effect
relationships. J Clin Pharmacol 52: 1328–42.
Darwish M, Kirby M, D’Andrea DM, et al. (2010)
Pharmacokinetics of armodafinil and modafinil after
single and multiple doses in patients with excessive
sleepiness associated with treated obstructive sleep apnea:
a randomized, open-label, crossover study. Clin Ther 32:
2074–87.
Dauvilliers Y, Tafti M (2006) Molecular genetics and treatment
of narcolepsy. Ann Med 38: 252–62.
De la Herran-Arita AK, Garcia-Garcia F (2014) Narcolepsy as
an immune-mediated disease. Sleep Disord 2014: 792687.
Dinges DF, Weaver TE (2003) Effects of modafinil on
sustained attention performance and quality of life in OSA
patients with residual sleepiness while being treated with
CPAP. Sleep Med 4: 393–402.
Dresler M, Spoormaker VI, Beitinger P, et al. (2014)
Neuroscience-driven discovery and development of sleep
therapeutics. Pharmacol Ther 141: 300–34.
Eckel-Mahan KL, Patel VR, de Mateo S, et al. (2013)
Reprogramming of the circadian clock by nutritional
challenge. Cell 155: 1464–78.




<<<PAGE 611>>>

Suggested Reading and Selected References

Ellis CM, Monk C, Simmons A, et al. (1999) Functional
magnetic resonance imaging neuroactivation studies
in normal subjects and subjects with the narcoleptic
syndrome. Actions of modafinil. J Sleep Res 8: 85–93.

Krakow B, Ulibarri VA (2013) Prevalence of sleep breathing
complaints reported by treatment-seeking chronic insomnia
disorder patients on presentation to a sleep medical center: a
preliminary report. Sleep Breath 17: 317–22.

Epstein LJ, Kristo D, Strollo PJ, et al. (2009) Clinical guideline
for the evaluation, management and long-term care of
obstructive sleep apnea in adults. J Clin Sleep Med 5: 263–76.

Kripke DE, Nievergelt CM, Joo E, et al. (2009) Circadian
polymorphisms associated with affective disorders. J
Circadian Rhythms 27: 2.

Erman MK, Seiden DJ, Yang R, et al. (2011) Efficacy and
tolerability of armodafinil: effect on clinical condition
late in the shift and overall functioning of patients with
excessive sleepiness associated with shift work disorder.
J Occup Environ Med 53: 1460–5.

Krystal AD, Harsh JR, Yang R et al. (2010) A double-blind,
placebo-controlled study of armodafinil for excessive
sleepiness in patients with treated obstructive sleep apnea
and comorbid depression. J Clin Psychiatry 71: 32–40.

Froy O (2010) Metabolism and circadian rhythms:
implications for obesity. Endocr Rev 31: 1–24.

Lallukka T, Kaikkonen R, Harkanen T, et al. (2014) Sleep and
sickness absence: a nationally representative register-based
follow-up study. Sleep 37: 1413–25.

Golombek DA, Casiraghi LP, Agostino PV, et al. (2013) The times
they are a-changing: effects of circadian desynchronization
on physiology and disease. J Physiol Paris 107: 310–22.

Landrigan CP, Rothschild JM, Cronin JW, et al. (2004) Effect of
reducing interns work hours on serious medical errors in
intensive care units. New Engl J Med 351: 1838–48.

Guo X, Zheng L, Wang J, et al. (2013) Epidemiological
evidence for the link between sleep duration and high
blood pressure: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Sleep Med 14: 324–32.

Larson-Prior LJ, Ju Y, Galvin JE (2014) Cortical–subcortical
interactions in hypersomnia disorders: mechanisms
underlying cognitive and behavioral aspects of the sleep–
wake cycle. Front Neurol 5: 1–13.

Hampp G, Ripperger JA, Houben T, et al. (2008) Regulation
of monoamine oxidase A by circadian-clock components
implies influence on mood. Curr Biol 18: 678–83.

Laudon M, Frydman-Marom A (2014) Therapeutic effects
of melatonin receptor agonists on sleep and comorbid
disorders. Int J Mol Sci 15: 15924–50.

Harrison EM, Gorman MR (2012) Changing the waveform
of circadian rhythms: considerations for shift-work. Front
Neurol 3: 1–7.

Liira J, Verbeek JH, Costa G, et al. (2014) Pharmacological
interventions for sleepiness and sleep disturbances caused
by shift work. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 8: CD009776.

Hart CL, Haney M, Vosburg SK, et al. (2006) Modafinil attentuates
disruptions in cognitive performance during simulated nightshift work. Neuropsychopharmacology 31: 1526–36.

Lim DC, Veasey SC (2010) Neural injury in sleep apnea. Curr
Neurol Neurosci Rep 10: 47–52.

He B, Peng H, Zhao Y, et al. (2011) Modafinil treatment
prevents REM sleep deprivation-induced brain function
impairment by increasing MMP-9 expression. Brain Res
1426: 38–42.
Hirai N, Nishino S (2011) Recent advances in the treatment of
narcolepsy. Curr Treat Options Neurol 13: 437–57.
Horne JA, Ostberg O (1976) A self-assessment questionnaire
to determine morningness–eveningness in human
circadian rhythms. Int J Chronobiol 4: 97–100.
Johansson C, Willeit M, Smedh C, et al. (2003) Circadian
clock-related polymorphisms in seasonal affective
disorder and their relevance to diurnal preference.
Neuropsychopharmacology 28: 734–9.

Liu Y, Wheaton AG, Chapman DP, et al. (2013) Sleep duration
and chronic disease among US adults age 45 years and
older: evidence from the 2010 behavioral risk factor
surveillance system. Sleep 36: 1421–7.
Madras BK, Xie Z, Lin Z, et al. (2006) Modafinil occupies
dopamine and norepinephrine transporters in vivo and
modulates the transporters and trace amine activity in
vitro. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 319: 561–9.
Makris AP, Rush CR, Frederich RC, Kelly TH (2004) Wakepromoting agents with different mechanisms of action:
comparison of effects of modafinil and amphetamine
on food intake and cardiovascular activity. Appetite 42:
185–95.

Khalsa SB, Jewett ME, Cajochen C, et al. (2003) A phase
response curve to single bright light pulses in human
subjects. J Physiol 549(pt 3): 945–52.

Mansour HA, Wood J, Logue T, et al. (2006) Association
of eight circadian genes with bipolar I disorder,
schizoaffective disorder and schizophrenia. Genes Brain
Behav 5: 150–7.

Knudsen S, Biering-Sorensen B, Kornum BR, et al. (2012)
Early IVIg treatment has no effect on post-H1N1
narcolepsy phenotype or hypocretin deficiency. Neurology
79: 102–3.

Masri S, Kinouchi K, Sassone-Corsi P (2015) Circadian clocks,
epigenetics, and cancer. Curr Opin Oncol 27: 50–6.

Martin JL, Hakim AD (2011) Wrist actigraphy. Chest 139:
1514–27.

595


