<<<PAGE 22>>>

STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

practice before the discovery of β-endorphin; marijuana
was smoked before the discovery of cannabinoid
receptors and endocannabinoids; the benzodiazepines
Valium (diazepam) and Xanax (alprazolam) were
prescribed before the discovery of benzodiazepine
receptors; and the antidepressants Elavil (amitriptyline)
and Prozac (fluoxetine) entered clinical practice before
molecular clarification of the serotonin transporter
site. This underscores the point that the great majority
of drugs that act in the central nervous system act
upon the process of neurotransmission. Indeed, this
apparently occurs at times in a manner that can mimic
the actions of the brain itself, when the brain uses its
own chemicals.
Input to any neuron can involve many different
neurotransmitters coming from many different neuronal
circuits. Understanding these inputs to neurons within
functioning circuits can provide a rational basis for
selecting and combining therapeutic agents. This
theme is discussed extensively in each chapter on the
various psychiatric disorders. The idea is that for the
modern psychopharmacologist to influence abnormal
neurotransmission in patients with psychiatric disorders,
it may be necessary to target neurons in specific circuits.
Since these networks of neurons send and receive
information via a variety of neurotransmitters, it may
therefore be not only rational but necessary to use
multiple drugs with multiple neurotransmitter actions
for patients with psychiatric disorders, especially if single
agents with single neurotransmitter mechanisms are not
effective in relieving symptoms.
Neurotransmission: Classic, Retrograde, and Volume

Classic neurotransmission begins with an electrical
process by which neurons send electrical impulses from
one part of the cell to another part of the same cell via
their axons (see neuron A of Figure 1-3). However,
these electrical impulses do not jump directly to other
neurons. Classic neurotransmission between neurons
involves one neuron hurling a chemical messenger, or
neurotransmitter, at the receptors of a second neuron
(see the synapse between neuron A and neuron B in
Figure 1-3). This happens frequently but not exclusively
at the sites of synaptic connections. In the human brain,
a hundred billion neurons each make thousands of
synapses with other neurons for an estimated trillion
chemically neurotransmitting synapses.
Communication between all these neurons at synapses
is chemical, not electrical. That is, an electrical impulse

6

in the first neuron is converted to a chemical signal at
the synapse between it and a second neuron, in a process
known as excitation–secretion coupling, the first stage of
chemical neurotransmission. This occurs predominantly
but not exclusively in one direction, from the presynaptic
axon terminal to a second postsynaptic neuron (Figures
1-2 and 1-3). Finally, neurotransmission continues in
the second neuron either by converting the chemical
information from the first neuron back into an electrical
impulse in the second neuron, or, perhaps more elegantly,
by the chemical information from the first neuron
triggering a cascade of further chemical messages within
the second neuron to change that neuron’s molecular and
genetic functioning (Figure 1-3).
An interesting twist to chemical neurotransmission
is the discovery that postsynaptic neurons can also
“talk back” to their presynaptic neurons. They can do
this via retrograde neurotransmission from the second
neuron to the first at the synapse between them (Figure
1-5, right panel). Chemicals produced specifically as
retrograde neurotransmitters at some synapses include
the endocannabinoids (EC, also known as “endogenous
marijuana”), which are synthesized in the postsynaptic
neuron. They are then released and diffuse to presynaptic
cannabinoid receptors such as the CB1 or cannabinoid
1 receptor (Figure 1-5, right panel). Another retrograde
neurotransmitter is the gaseous neurotransmitter nitric
oxide (NO), which is synthesized postsynaptically and
then diffuses out of the postsynaptic membrane and
into the presynaptic membrane to interact with cyclic
guanosine monophosphate (cGMP)-sensitive targets
there (Figure 1-5, right panel). A third type of retrograde
neurotransmitter are neurotrophic factors such as nerve
growth factor (NGF), which is released from postsynaptic
sites, and then diffuses to the presynaptic neuron,
where it is taken up into vesicles, and transported all
the way back to the cell nucleus via retrograde transport
systems to interact with the genome there (Figure 1-5,
right panel). What these retrograde neurotransmitters
have to say to the presynaptic neuron and how this
modifies or regulates the communication between pre
and postsynaptic neuron are subjects of intense active
investigation.
In addition to “reverse” or retrograde
neurotransmission at synapses, some neurotransmission
does not need a synapse at all! Neurotransmission
without a synapse is called volume neurotransmission, or
nonsynaptic diffusion neurotransmission (examples are
shown in Figures 1-6 through 1-8). Chemical messengers




<<<PAGE 351>>>

Chapter 7: Treatments for Mood Disorders

Arousal Combos
SNRI + stimulant
= SNRI

5HT

NE

DA

single boost

double boost

single boost

= stimulant

SERT

NET

SNRI

SNRI

A

DAT
stimulant

stimulant

SNRI + modafinil
= SNRI

5HT

NE

DA

single boost

single boost

single boost

= modafinil

SERT
B

NET
SNRI

SNRI

DAT

7

modafinil

Figure 7-66 Arousal combo: SNRI plus stimulant/modafinil. (A) Serotonin (5HT) and dopamine (DA) are single-boosted and
norepinephrine (NE) is double-boosted when a serotonin–norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor (SNRI) is combined with a stimulant. (B)
Serotonin (5HT) and norepinephrine (NE) are single-boosted by the serotonin–norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor (SNRI) while dopamine
(DA) is single-boosted by modafinil.

Table 7-2 Some tricyclic antidepressants still in use

Generic name

Trade name

Clomipramine

Anafranil

Imipramine

Tofranil

Amitriptyline

Elavil; Endep; Tryptizol;
Laroxyl

Nortriptyline

Pamelor; Aventyl

Protriptyline

Vivactil

Maprotiline

Ludiomil

Amoxapine

Asendin

Doxepin

Sinequan; Adapin

Desipramine

Norpramin; Pertofran

Trimipramine

Surmontil

Dothiepin

Prothiaden

Lofepramine

Deprimyl; Gamanil

Tianeptine

Coaxil; Stablon

structure contains three rings. The TCAs were
synthesized about the same time that other threeringed phenothiazine molecules were shown to be
effective tranquilizers for schizophrenia (i.e., the early
D2 antagonist drugs such as chlorpromazine) but were
a disappointment when tested as drugs for psychosis.
However, during testing for schizophrenia, they were
serendipitously discovered to be effective in unipolar
depression. Tricyclic antidepressants are not merely drugs
for depression since one of them (clomipramine) has
anti-obsessive–compulsive disorder; many of them have
anti-panic effects at antidepressant doses and efficacy for
neuropathic and low back pain at low doses.
Long after their antidepressant properties were
observed, the TCAs were discovered to block the reuptake
pumps for norepinephrine (i.e., NET), or for both
norepinephrine and serotonin (i.e., SERT) (see Figure
7-67A). Some tricyclics have equal or greater potency for
SERT inhibition (e.g., clomipramine); others are more
selective for NET inhibition (e.g., desipramine, maprotiline,
335


