<<<PAGE 21>>>

Chapter 1: Chemical Neurotransmission

1

presynaptic
neuron
mitochondrion

synaptic
vesicles

vesicles
synaptic cleft
releasing
neurotransmitter

postsynaptic
neuron
Figure 1-4 Enlarged synapse. The synapse is enlarged conceptually here showing the specialized structures that enable chemical
neurotransmission to occur. Specifically, a presynaptic neuron sends its axon terminal to form a synapse with a postsynaptic neuron.
Energy for neurotransmission from the presynaptic neuron is provided by mitochondria there. Chemical neurotransmitters are stored
in small vesicles, ready for release upon firing of the presynaptic neuron. The synaptic cleft is the gap between the presynaptic neuron
and the postsynaptic neuron; it contains proteins and scaffolding and molecular forms of “synaptic glue” to reinforce the connection
between the neurons. Receptors are present on both sides of this cleft and are key elements of chemical neurotransmission.

psychiatric disorders and their symptoms are diagnosed
and treated. The chemistry of neurotransmission in
specific brain regions and how these principles are
applied to various specific psychiatric disorders, treated
with various specific psychotropic drugs, are discussed
throughout the rest of the book.

PRINCIPLES OF CHEMICAL
NEUROTRANSMISSION
Neurotransmitters

There are more than a dozen known or
suspected neurotransmitters in the brain. For
psychopharmacologists, it is particularly important to
know the six key neurotransmitter systems targeted by
psychotropic drugs:
serotonin
norepinephrine
dopamine

acetylcholine
glutamate
GABA (γ-aminobutyric acid)
Each is discussed in detail in the clinical chapters related
to the specific drugs that target them.
Other neurotransmitters that are also important
neurotransmitters and neuromodulators, such as
histamine and various neuropeptides and hormones,
are mentioned in brief throughout the relevant clinical
chapters in this textbook.
Some neurotransmitters are very similar to drugs
and have been called “God’s pharmacopeia.” For
example, it is well known that the brain makes its own
morphine (i.e., β-endorphin) and its own marijuana (i.e.,
endocannabinoids). The brain may even make its own
Prozac, its own Xanax, and and its own hallucinogens!
Drugs often mimic the brain’s natural neurotransmitters
and some drugs have been discovered prior to the natural
neurotransmitter. Thus, morphine was used in clinical
5




<<<PAGE 22>>>

STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

practice before the discovery of β-endorphin; marijuana
was smoked before the discovery of cannabinoid
receptors and endocannabinoids; the benzodiazepines
Valium (diazepam) and Xanax (alprazolam) were
prescribed before the discovery of benzodiazepine
receptors; and the antidepressants Elavil (amitriptyline)
and Prozac (fluoxetine) entered clinical practice before
molecular clarification of the serotonin transporter
site. This underscores the point that the great majority
of drugs that act in the central nervous system act
upon the process of neurotransmission. Indeed, this
apparently occurs at times in a manner that can mimic
the actions of the brain itself, when the brain uses its
own chemicals.
Input to any neuron can involve many different
neurotransmitters coming from many different neuronal
circuits. Understanding these inputs to neurons within
functioning circuits can provide a rational basis for
selecting and combining therapeutic agents. This
theme is discussed extensively in each chapter on the
various psychiatric disorders. The idea is that for the
modern psychopharmacologist to influence abnormal
neurotransmission in patients with psychiatric disorders,
it may be necessary to target neurons in specific circuits.
Since these networks of neurons send and receive
information via a variety of neurotransmitters, it may
therefore be not only rational but necessary to use
multiple drugs with multiple neurotransmitter actions
for patients with psychiatric disorders, especially if single
agents with single neurotransmitter mechanisms are not
effective in relieving symptoms.
Neurotransmission: Classic, Retrograde, and Volume

Classic neurotransmission begins with an electrical
process by which neurons send electrical impulses from
one part of the cell to another part of the same cell via
their axons (see neuron A of Figure 1-3). However,
these electrical impulses do not jump directly to other
neurons. Classic neurotransmission between neurons
involves one neuron hurling a chemical messenger, or
neurotransmitter, at the receptors of a second neuron
(see the synapse between neuron A and neuron B in
Figure 1-3). This happens frequently but not exclusively
at the sites of synaptic connections. In the human brain,
a hundred billion neurons each make thousands of
synapses with other neurons for an estimated trillion
chemically neurotransmitting synapses.
Communication between all these neurons at synapses
is chemical, not electrical. That is, an electrical impulse

6

in the first neuron is converted to a chemical signal at
the synapse between it and a second neuron, in a process
known as excitation–secretion coupling, the first stage of
chemical neurotransmission. This occurs predominantly
but not exclusively in one direction, from the presynaptic
axon terminal to a second postsynaptic neuron (Figures
1-2 and 1-3). Finally, neurotransmission continues in
the second neuron either by converting the chemical
information from the first neuron back into an electrical
impulse in the second neuron, or, perhaps more elegantly,
by the chemical information from the first neuron
triggering a cascade of further chemical messages within
the second neuron to change that neuron’s molecular and
genetic functioning (Figure 1-3).
An interesting twist to chemical neurotransmission
is the discovery that postsynaptic neurons can also
“talk back” to their presynaptic neurons. They can do
this via retrograde neurotransmission from the second
neuron to the first at the synapse between them (Figure
1-5, right panel). Chemicals produced specifically as
retrograde neurotransmitters at some synapses include
the endocannabinoids (EC, also known as “endogenous
marijuana”), which are synthesized in the postsynaptic
neuron. They are then released and diffuse to presynaptic
cannabinoid receptors such as the CB1 or cannabinoid
1 receptor (Figure 1-5, right panel). Another retrograde
neurotransmitter is the gaseous neurotransmitter nitric
oxide (NO), which is synthesized postsynaptically and
then diffuses out of the postsynaptic membrane and
into the presynaptic membrane to interact with cyclic
guanosine monophosphate (cGMP)-sensitive targets
there (Figure 1-5, right panel). A third type of retrograde
neurotransmitter are neurotrophic factors such as nerve
growth factor (NGF), which is released from postsynaptic
sites, and then diffuses to the presynaptic neuron,
where it is taken up into vesicles, and transported all
the way back to the cell nucleus via retrograde transport
systems to interact with the genome there (Figure 1-5,
right panel). What these retrograde neurotransmitters
have to say to the presynaptic neuron and how this
modifies or regulates the communication between pre
and postsynaptic neuron are subjects of intense active
investigation.
In addition to “reverse” or retrograde
neurotransmission at synapses, some neurotransmission
does not need a synapse at all! Neurotransmission
without a synapse is called volume neurotransmission, or
nonsynaptic diffusion neurotransmission (examples are
shown in Figures 1-6 through 1-8). Chemical messengers


