<<<PAGE 11>>>

Preface to the Fifth Edition

WHAT’S NEW IN THE FIFTH
EDITION?
For this fifth edition of Stahl’s Essential
Psychopharmacology you will notice that every figure in the
book has been revised, refreshed, and updated with new
colors, shading, and outlining. About half the figures are
entirely new. The number of chapters has decreased by one,
with merger of mood stabilizers into treatments for mood
disorders; the text itself and the total number of figures and
tables are all approximately the same in length and number,
although all chapters have been edited, most of them
extensively, with the details of what has changed listed
below. The number of references has now been doubled.
Overall, 14 drugs have new uses and indications presented,
and 18 brand new drugs are introduced and discussed.
Highlights of what has been added or changed since
the fourth edition include:
• New coverage of interference RNA (iRNA) in basic
neuroscience chapters
• Restructuring all chapters to reflect neurosciencebased nomenclature, that is, drugs named for their
mechanism of action rather than use
• Thus, drugs for depression are not “antidepressants”
but “monoamine reuptake inhibitors with
antidepressant action”; drugs for psychosis are not
“antipsychotics” but “serotonin/dopamine antagonists
with antipsychotic actions,” etc.
• The psychosis chapter has:
• new coverage of the direct and indirect striatal
dopamine pathways
• new coverage of trace amines, receptors, and
pharmacology
• revision of the classic dopamine theory of psychosis
• two new theories of psychosis (serotonin and
glutamate)
• coverage of dementia-related psychosis and Parkinson
psychosis in addition to schizophrenia psychosis
• updated coverage of new indications for drugs
previously approved, including lurasidone,
cariprazine, and brexpiprazole

• describes five new drugs for psychosis: lumateperone
approved, and xanomeline, pimavanserin, trace
amine-associated receptor type 1 (TAAR1) agonists,
and roluperidone in development
• updated receptor binding data for all drugs
• new coverage of tardive dyskinesia and new drug
treatments: deutetrabenazine and valbenazine
• new coverage of uses of serotonin–dopamine
drugs for psychosis that are now used even more
frequently for depression
• The chapters on mood disorders have:
• new coverage of mixed mood states
• new coverage of GABAA (γ-aminobutyric acid A)
receptor subtypes and neurosteroid binding sites
• new coverage of neurotrophic growth factors and
neuroplasticity in depression
• new coverage of inflammation in depression
• mood stabilizers redefined
• new/expanded coverage of levomilnacipran,
vortioxetine
• new coverage of treating cognition in depression
• new drugs: neuroactive steroids, ketamine/
esketamine, dextromethorphan combinations,
dextromethadone
• expanded coverage of treatment resistance
and augmentation treatments for monoamine
reuptake inhibitors including brexpiprazole,
ketamine, esketamine, and trials with cariprazine,
pimavanserin
• expanded coverage of new hypotheses of
neuroplastic downstream changes following
NMDA (N-methyl-D-aspartate) antagonist therapy
with ketamine, esketamine, and others
• expanded coverage of treating bipolar depression
with new indications and new drugs lurasidone,
cariprazine
• The anxiety chapter has:
• removal of obsessive–complusive disorder (OCD)
to the impulsivity chapter
• coverage of posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) as
a traumatic disorder rather than anxiety disorder
ix




<<<PAGE 71>>>

Chapter 3: Ion Channels

Table 3-2 Key ligand-gated ion channels directly targeted by psychotropic drugs

Neurotransmitter

Ligand-gated ion
channel receptor
subtype directly
targeted

Pharmacological
action

Drug class

Therapeutic
action

Acetylcholine

Alpha4 Beta2
nicotinic

Partial agonist

Nicotinic receptor
partial agonist (NRPA)
(varenicline)

Smoking cessation

GABAA
benzodiazepine
receptors

Full agonist,
phasic inhibition

Benzodiazepines

Anxiolytic

GABAA nonbenzodiazepine
PAM sites

Full agonist,
phasic inhibition

“Z DRUGS”/hypnotics
(zolpidem, zaleplon,
zopiclone, eszopiclone)

Improves insomnia

GABAA neurosteroid
sites
(benzodiazepine
insensitive)

Full agonist,
tonic inhibition

Neuroactive steroids
(allopregnanolone)

Postpartum depression
Rapid-acting
antidepressant
Anesthetic

NMDA
NAM channel sites/
Mg++ sites

Antagonist

NMDA glutamate
antagonist (memantine)

Pro-cognitive in
Alzheimer disease

NMDA openchannel sites

Antagonist

PCP/phencyclidine
Ketamine
Dextromethorphan
Dextromethadone

Dissociative
hallucinogen
Anesthetic
Pseudobulbar affect
Agitation in Alzheimer
disease
Rapid-acting
antidepressant
Treatment-resistant
depression

5HT3

Antagonist

Mirtazapine
Vortioxetine

Pro-cognitive
Antidepressant

5HT3

Antagonist

Anti-emetic

Reduce
chemotherapyinduced emesis

GABA

Glutamate

Serotonin

3

PAM, positive allosteric modulator; NAM, negative allosteric modulator; NMDA, N-methyl-D-aspartate; Mg, magnesium.

ion channels (Figure 3-3) are analogous to pentameric
subtypes of ion channels (Figure 3-2A), but just have four
subunits rather than five. Receptor sites are in various
locations on each of the subunits; some binding sites are
in the channel, but many are present at different locations
outside the channel.
This tetrameric structure is typical of the ionotropic
glutamate receptors known as AMPA (α-amino-3hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazole-propionic acid), kainate,

and NMDA (N-methyl-D-aspartate) subtypes (Table 3-3).
Drugs that act directly at tetrameric ionotropic glutamate
receptors are listed in Table 3-2. Receptor subtypes for
glutamate according to the selective agonist acting at that
receptor as well as the specific molecular subunits that
comprise that subtype are listed in Table 3-3. Subtype
selective drugs for ionotropic glutamate receptors are
under investigation but not currently used in clinical
practice.

55




<<<PAGE 299>>>

7

Treatments for Mood Disorders:
So-Called “Antidepressants” and
“Mood Stabilizers”

Definitions of Clinical Effects of Treatment in
Depression 284
How Well Do Classic Monoamine Reuptake
Blockers Work in Unipolar Depression? 285
Redefining “Mood Stabilizers”: A Labile Label 288
Drugs for Unipolar Depression 289
Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors
(SSRIs) 289
Serotonin Partial Agonist Reuptake Inhibitors
(SPARIs) 296
Serotonin–Norepinephrine Reuptake Inhibitors
(SNRIs) 298
Norepinephrine–Dopamine Reuptake Inhibitors
(NDRIs): Bupropion 303
Agomelatine 306
Mirtazapine 308
Serotonin Antagonist/Reuptake Inhibitors
(SARIs) 311
Vortioxetine 315
Neuroactive Steroids 320
Treatment Resistance in Unipolar
Depression 323

In this chapter, we will review pharmacological
concepts underlying the use of drugs used to treat
mood disorders, from depression, to mixed states,
to mania. These agents have classically been called
“antidepressants” and “mood stabilizers” but this
terminology is now considered out of date and confusing
since not all drugs classically called “antidepressants”
are used to treat all forms of depression – especially
not bipolar depression or depression with mixed
features. Furthermore, many of the classic so-called
“antidepressants” are also used to treat a whole range of
disorders from anxiety disorders, to eating disorders,
traumatic disorders, obsessive compulsive and impulsive
disorders, pain, and beyond. Finally, many of the drugs
used for psychosis and discussed extensively in Chapter
5 are used even more commonly to treat depression,
unipolar, bipolar, and mixed depression, as well as
mania, yet are not generally classed as “antidepressants”

Choosing Treatment for Treatment Resistance in
Depression on the Basis of Genetic Testing 323
Augmenting Strategies for Unipolar
Depression 325
Second-Line Monotherapies Used for TreatmentResistant Depression 333
Drugs for Bipolar Disorder Spectrum 338
Serotonin/Dopamine Blockers: Not Just for
Psychosis and Psychotic Mania 338
Lithium, the Classic “Antimanic” and “Mood
Stabilizer” 345
Anticonvulsants as “Mood Stabilizers” 346
Anticonvulsants with Proven Efficacy in Bipolar
Disorder 347
Combinations are the Standard for Treating Bipolar
Disorder 353
Future Treatments for Mood Disorders 353
Dextromethorphan–Bupropion and
Dextromethorphan–Quinidine 353
Dextromethadone 355
Hallucinogen-Assisted Psychotherapy 355
Summary 358

although they are certainly “drugs for depression.” To
eliminate confusion about how to discuss categories
of drugs, throughout this textbook we strive to utilize
modern neuroscience-based nomenclature, where drugs
are named for their pharmacological mechanism of
action and not for their clinical indication.
Thus, drugs discussed in this chapter have
“antidepressant action” but are not called
“antidepressants.” Other drugs have mood-stabilizing and
antimanic action but are not called “mood stabilizers.”
What is a “mood stabilizer”? Originally, a mood stabilizer
was a drug that treated mania and prevented recurrence
of mania, thus “stabilizing” the manic pole of bipolar
disorder. Others use this term for a drug that treats
depression and recurrence of depression in bipolar
disorder thus stabilizing the depressed pole of bipolar
disorder. Rather than use the term for stabilizing either
mania or depression, here we will use terms to describe

283




<<<PAGE 327>>>

Chapter 7: Treatments for Mood Disorders

also those localized in the gastrointestinal tract itself,
where they mediate nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea/
bowel motility when stimulated by serotonin, including
when stimulated by serotonin that is a side effect of
peripherally increased serotonin by SSRIs/SNRIs.
Blocking these 5HT3 receptors can therefore protect
against chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting
as well as against serotonin-induced gastrointestinal
side effects that can accompany agents that increase
serotonin.
More important to the mechanism of action of central
5HT3 antagonists such as mirtazapine and vortioxetine
in the treatment of unipolar depression are the 5HT3
receptors in the brain that regulate the release of
various neurotransmitters downstream in some brain
circuits that mediate the symptoms of depression. 5HT3
receptors in the brain are usually localized on GABA
(γ-aminobutyric acid) interneurons, and they are always
excitatory. This means that when serotonin stimulates a
5HT3 receptor, it causes GABA to inhibit whatever neuron
is downstream from it. This was shown for 5HT3–GABA
interactions at glutamate neurons (Figure 4-49) and
at acetylcholine and norepinephrine neurons (Figure
4-48). 5HT3 antagonism is a powerful disinhibitor of
glutamate release (Figure 7-42) and of acetylcholine and
norepinephrine (Figure 7-43), actions that theoretically
release neurotransmitters downstream to have
antidepressant action.
Serotonin Antagonist/Reuptake Inhibitors (SARIs)

The prototype drug that blocks serotonin 2A and 2C
receptors as well as serotonin reuptake is trazodone,
classified as a serotonin antagonist/reuptake inhibitor
(SARI) (Figure 7-44). Nefazodone is another SARI with
robust 5HT2A antagonist actions and weaker 5HT2C
antagonism and SERT inhibition, but is no longer
commonly used because of rare liver toxicity (Figure
7-44). Trazodone is a very interesting agent, since it acts
like two different drugs, depending upon the dose and
the formulation. We discussed a very similar situation in
Chapter 5 for quetiapine (Figure 5-46).
A more complete picture of trazodone’s binding
properties has emerged from recent studies (Figures 7-44
and 7-45) and reflects that it is a serotonin antagonist
not just at 5HT2A and 5HT2C receptors, but also at 5HT1D,
5HT2B, and 5HT7 receptors. In addition, trazodone has
potent antagonist properties at α1B, α1A, α2C, and α2B
receptors, H1 histamine receptors, and agonist actions at
5HT1A receptors (Figure 7-45). Because of these various
pharmacological actions occur with varying potencies,

it means that trazodone will act predominantly via its
highest-affinity receptor interactions at low doses, and
will recruit its lower-affinity receptor actions at higher
doses.
Different Drug at Different Doses and at Different
Delivery Rates?

Trazodone is famous for its effectiveness and utility at
low doses as a hypnotic (Figure 7-46). That is, doses of
trazodone lower than those effective for antidepressant
action are quite frequently used for insomnia. Hypnotic
doses engage the receptors for which trazodone has
the highest affinity and, amongst these, blockade is
hypothetically linked to hypnotic actions (i.e., 5HT2A,
α1 subtypes, and H1). Blocking 5HT2A receptors
enhances slow-wave sleep, and blocking α1 subtypes
and H1 receptors interferes with monoamine arousal
mechanisms (discussed in Chapter 5 and illustrated in
Figures 5-13 and 5-14). The best way to deliver a hypnotic
is with a standard oral formulation that is immediate in
onset, peaks quickly, and is out of the system by morning.
Since insomnia is one of the most frequent residual
symptoms of depression after treatment with an SSRI/
SNRI (discussed earlier in this chapter and illustrated in
Figure 7-5), addition of a hypnotic is often necessary in
treating patients with a major depressive episode. Not
only can addition of a hypnotic potentially relieve the
insomnia itself, it may also increase remission rates due
to improvement of other symptoms such as loss of energy
and depressed mood (Figure 7-5). Thus, the ability of low
doses of trazodone to improve sleep in depressed patients
has led to its popular use at low doses as an augmenting
option for residual insomnia that persists after treatment
with SSRIs/SNRIs.
The original oral formulation of trazodone used for
depression was short in duration, required multiple daily
doses higher than hypnotic doses (Figure 7-47), and was
associated with peak dose sedation after daytime doses,
not an ideal profile for a drug for unipolar depression.
Although trazodone’s antidepressant actions at higher
doses are undisputed as well as its lack of causing sexual
dysfunction or weight gain, the presence of daytime
sedation makes using trazodone at antidepressant doses
in the standard oral formulation difficult in clinical
practice. However, a once-daily controlled-release
formulation with higher doses of trazodone is available
for use in depression, which blunts peak plasma drug
levels to reduce daytime sedation. These higher doses
recruit additional known antidepressant receptor actions,
including serotonin reuptake inhibition (Figures 7-10
311

7




<<<PAGE 331>>>

Chapter 7: Treatments for Mood Disorders

Trazodone for Depression:
Serotonin Antagonist/
Reuptake Inhibitor (SARI)
α
1

Trazodone for Insomnia:
Multifunctional Neurotransmitter
Antagonist

α
2

A
T1
5H

5H

α1

H
1

T2

A

5HT1D

trazodone
mianserin

H1

SERT

5HT2A

B
HT2

5HT7

5H

T2
C

5

Figure 7-46 Trazodone at different doses. (Left)
High doses that recruit saturation of the
serotonin transporter (i.e., 150–600 mg) are
required for trazodone to have therapeutic
actions in depression. At this high dose,
trazodone is a multifunctional serotonergic
agent with antagonist actions at 5HT2A and
5HT2C receptors as well as additional serotonin
receptors. Trazodone is also an α1 and histamine
1 (H1) antagonist at these doses. (Right) At lower
doses of trazodone (i.e., 25–150 mg), it does
not saturate the serotonin transporter; it does,
however, retain antagonist actions at 5HT2A, α1,
and H1 receptors, with corresponding efficacy for
insomnia.

dose for depression
(150-600 mg)

dose for insomnia
(25-150 mg)

Figure 7-47 Trazodone IR versus XR
given once nightly. Shown here are
steady-state estimates of the plasma
trazodone levels from the hypnotic dosing
of 50, 75, or 100 mg once nightly of
trazodone immediate release (IR). Peak
drug concentrations are reached rapidly
with a similarly rapid fall off overnight.
The minimum levels estimated for
antidepressant actions of trazodone are
reached transiently, if at all, by hypnotic
dosing. By contrast, 300 mg of trazodone
extended release (XR) given once
nightly generates plasma levels that rise
slowly and never fall below minimum
antidepressant concentrations. Peak levels
of trazodone XR at 300 mg are about the
same as the peak levels of trazodone IR
at 100 mg.

Trazodone IR vs. XR Given Once Nightly
2.2
2
1.8
1.6
1.4

300 mg XR qhs

mg/L

1.2
1

100 mg IR qhs

minimum
antidepressant
concentration

0.8
0.65
0.5
0.3

75 mg IR qhs
50 mg IR qhs

0.1
0
23:30

4:00

8:00

12:00

16:00

20:00

23:30

hours

Vortioxetine

Vortioxetine is a drug approved for treating unipolar
depression and which causes SERT inhibition as well as
having antagonist actions at 5HT3 and 5HT7 receptors,
with agonist actions at 5HT1A receptors and weak
partial agonist to antagonist actions at 5HT1B/D receptors
(Figure 7-49). This unique blend of pharmacological
actions leads to downstream release of many different
neurotransmitters as will be explained here, and these
actions hypothetically lead to antidepressant effects
in unipolar depression, characterized by robust pro-

cognitive actions, especially improving processing speed.
The importance of cognitive symptoms in unipolar
depression is discussed in Chapter 6 as the possible
clinical consequence of loss of neurotrophic factors,
synapses, and neurons (Figures 6-27 through 6-31).
What is cognitive processing speed and what could
be the mechanism by which vortioxetine improves this
more than other antidepressants? “Cognition” is not a
single, simple brain function and “cognitive dysfunction”
is not a single, simple symptom. Cognitive impairment
that can be measured as part of the symptom profile
315

7




<<<PAGE 333>>>

Chapter 7: Treatments for Mood Disorders

vortioxetine
T
5H
1A

5H

T1B

5HT1D

SERT

T3

5HT7

5H

Figure 7-49 Vortioxetine. Vortioxetine is a serotonin reuptake
inhibitor and also has actions at several serotonin receptors,
including 5HT1A, 5HT1B, 5HT1D, 5HT3, and 5HT7.

somewhat whimsical way to categorize cognitive
dysfunction and to understand the role of improving
individual domains of cognition applicable to
psychopharmacology is illustrated in Figure 7-50 as the
“Fab Four” of cognition. Remember the original Fab
Four, the Beatles? Each musician can represent one of the
Fab Four of cognition as well. John, arguably the leader,
wanted all the attention, so he represents “attention,”
which some also refer to as concentration. Paul, perhaps
the brains of the operation and the writer of many of
the songs, is “executive function,” also called “problem
solving.” The quiet culture carrier of the group, George,
represents memory, of which there are many kinds,
short-term, long-term, verbal, and more. And finally, the
drummer, Ringo, represents processing speed, or pace.
You can imagine if any of these four is out of synch with
the other three, the music would be a disaster. All four
can potentially be compromised in psychiatric disorders.
It turns out that for depression, a test that measures a bit
of all these dimensions of cognition, but arguably most
prominently measures processing speed, is the DSST
(digital symbol substitution test). When processing speed
is slowed, just like an offbeat drummer in a band, overall
cognitive functioning can also feel like a disaster for a
depressed patient, lagging in cognitive performance,
with mental effort now becoming exhausting and
work productivity greatly reduced, all causing great
frustration. This simple, quick DSST can be useful in

7
Figure 7-50 The “Fab Four” of cognition. Cognition is not
a single, simple brain function. Rather, there are four major
cognitive domains, represented here by the four members
of the Beatles: attention or concentration (John), executive
function or problem solving (Paul), memory (George), and
processing speed (Ringo). All four domains work in concert to
keep cognition playing at its best; if any one of these domains
dysfunctions, then cognitive impairment can occur.

calibrating the objective decline in cognitive performance
of patients with subjective cognitive complaints, and in
tracking their improvement on treatment. Vortioxetine
improves cognition better than other antidepressants in
unipolar major depression, as demonstrated by superior
performance on the DSST measuring processing speed.
How does vortioxetine work as an antidepressant and
specifically how does it exert its superior pro-cognitive
effects?
SERT Inhibition and 5HT1A Agonism

To begin, vortioxetine is a SERT inhibitor and a 5HT1A
agonist, thus combining the actions already discussed
for SSRIs (Figures 7-10 through 7-15) and for combining
SERT inhibition with 5HT1A agonists (see Chapter 5 and
Figures 7-23 through 7-27). These mechanisms alone
are sufficient for antidepressant action since they raise
both serotonin levels (SERT inhibition) and the pro317




<<<PAGE 334>>>

STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

5HT neuron

5HT1B/D
axon terminal
autoreceptor

SSRI
SERT
5HT1B/D
antagonist

A

B

C

Figure 7-51 SERT inhibition and 5HT1B/D presynaptic antagonism. (A) 5HT1B/D autoreceptors and serotonin transporters (SERTs) are
both present on the axon terminal of a serotonin (5HT) neuron. (B) When SERT is inhibited, synaptic availability of serotonin is increased.
However, serotonin binding at the 5HT1B/D receptor prevents further serotonin release. (C) When both SERTs and the 5HT1B/D receptors
are blocked, increased synaptic serotonin via SERT inhibition is combined with ongoing serotonin release via 5HT1B/D antagonism,
further increasing the availability of serotonin in the synapse.

cognitive neurotransmitter dopamine, acetylcholine,
and norepinephrine levels (5HT1A agonism) (see also
discussion in Chapter 4, Figure 4-44).

this enhances the release of the antidepressant and procognitive neurotransmitters dopamine, norepinephrine,
histamine, and acetylcholine (Figure 7-52B).

SERT Inhibition and 5HT1B/D Presynaptic Antagonism

SERT Inhibition and 5HT3 Antagonism

An additional receptor action that theoretically
raises serotonin levels even further than by SERT
inhibition alone is inhibition of the 5HT1B/D presynaptic
autoreceptor (Figure 7-51). That is, when SERT is
inhibited, the amount of synaptic serotonin that
accumulates is blunted because the build-up of serotonin
stimulates presynaptic 5HT1B/D autoreceptors, and this
turns off further serotonin release (compare Figure
7-51A and B). However, when 5HT1B/D presynaptic
autoreceptors are simultaneously inhibited, negative
feedback to serotonin release cannot occur, so serotonin
release increases even more (Figure 7-51C).

Another mechanism whereby 5HT3 antagonists enhance
the release of the pro-cognitive neurotransmitters
acetylcholine, dopamine, and norepinephrine is
illustrated in the earlier discussion of 5HT3- antagonism
(Figure 7-43) and is one of the most potent of
vortioxetine’s several pharmacological actions.

5HT1B Partial Agonism/Antagonism at
Heteroreceptors

Another putative mechanism of antidepressant and
pro-cognitive actions of vortioxetine is antagonist/partial
agonist actions on 5HT1B receptors located on presynaptic
nerve terminals of acetylcholine, dopamine, histamine,
and norepinephrine neurons in the prefrontal cortex.
These receptors were discussed earlier in Chapter 4 and
illustrated in Figure 4-45, showing how serotonin acting
at these receptors inhibits the release of acetylcholine,
histamine, dopamine, and norepinephrine. These
receptors are shown again in Figure 7-52A and when
they are blocked by a 5HT1B partial agonist/antagonist,
318

SERT Inhibition and 5HT7 Antagonism

Serotonin inhibits its own release by actions at 5HT7
receptors (compare Figures 7-53A and 7-53B). Thus,
antagonism at 5HT7 receptors enhances serotonin release,
especially in the presence of SERT inhibition (Figure
7-53C). Blocking 5HT7 receptors on GABA neurons in
the brainstem raphe prevents the downstream inhibition
of serotonin release by GABA, especially in the presence
of SERT inhibition, and leads instead to increased
downstream release of serotonin (Figure 7-53C).
5HT7 receptors also regulate glutamate release
downstream in the prefrontal cortex (Figure 7-54A).
Blocking these 5HT7 receptors on GABA interneurons
enhances the release of glutamate and of downstream
monoamine neurotransmitters (compare Figures 7-54A
and 7-54B), which may have both antidepressant and
pro-cognitive actions. Indeed, in experimental animals,
selective 5HT7 antagonists do have pro-cognitive and
antidepressant actions. Also, numerous agents with




<<<PAGE 335>>>

Chapter 7: Treatments for Mood Disorders

5HT1B Heteroreceptor Regulation of NE, DA, HA,
and ACh in Prefrontal Cortex
Baseline Neurotransmitter Release

Prefrontal Cortex

5HT
1B
Raphe

Figure 7-52 5HT1B heteroreceptors
regulate neurotransmitter release. (A)
5HT1B receptors on the presynaptic
nerve terminals of norepinephrine
(NE), dopamine (DA), acetylcholine
(ACh), and histamine (HA) neurons can
theoretically regulate the release of these
neurotransmitters. Serotonin (5HT) acting
at these receptors would be inhibitory.
(B) Antagonism or partial agonism of
5HT1B heteroreceptors on ACh, HA, DA,
and NE neurons would prevent serotonin
from exerting its inhibitory effects, thus
potentially increasing the release of these
neurotransmitters.

NE
1B
DA
1B
HA

1B
ACh

A

ACh
BF

HA
TMN

DA
VTA

NE

7

LC

5HT1B Antagonist/Partial Agonist Enhances Neurotransmitter Release
Prefrontal Cortex

5HT
1B
Raphe

5HT1B
antagonist/
partial agonist
1B
5HT1B
antagonist/
partial agonist

1B

5HT1B
antagonist/
partial agonist
1B
BF = Basal Forebrain
TMN = Tuberomammillary Nucleus
VTA = Ventral Tegmental Area
LC = Locus Coeruleus

5HT1B
antagonist/
partial agonist

ACh
BF

HA
TMN

B

5HT7 antagonism are effective drugs for depression and
possibly for improving cognition, including not only
vortioxetine, but also trazodone (Figures 7-44 and 7-45),
quetiapine, brexpiprazole, aripiprazole, and lurasidone
(see Chapter 5 and Figure 5-39).

DA
VTA

NE
LC

Putting it all together, vortioxetine’s pharmacological
mechanism of action is multimodal, with numerous
synergistic mechanisms not only leading to the release of
serotonin and to potentiating the release of serotonin (i.e.,
via SERT, 5HT1B/D presynaptic, and 5HT7 blockade), but
319




<<<PAGE 336>>>

STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Figure 7-53A 5HT7 receptors regulate
serotonin release, part 1. 5HT7
receptors are located on GABA
interneurons in the raphe nucleus. At
baseline, when these receptors are not
bound, serotonin is released into the
prefrontal cortex.

Baseline Serotonin Release

baseline
5HT release

PFC

overactivation

5HT7
receptor

GABA neuron

5HT
neuron

raphe

also leading to the release of four further antidepressant
and pro-cognitive neurotransmitters, namely dopamine,
norepinephrine, acetylcholine, and histamine (i.e., via
5HT1A agonism, 5HT1B heteroreceptor partial agonism/
antagonism, and 5HT3 antagonism). This unique
combination of mechanisms may account for the unique
pro-cognitive actions of vortioxetine in unipolar major
depression.
320

Neuroactive Steroids

Another rapid-onset mood treatment is the neuroactive
steroid brexanolone, a cyclodextrin-based intravenous
formulation of the naturally occurring neuroactive
steroid allopregnanolone (Figure 7-55). Administered
by a 60-hour intravenous infusion for postpartum
depression, brexanolone has a rapid-onset and sustained
antidepressant effect. As briefly mentioned in Chapter 6,




<<<PAGE 349>>>

Chapter 7: Treatments for Mood Disorders

esketamine
NMDA

known abilities to regulate neuronal organization,
arborization, and synapse formation may have the
downstream consequence of boosting monoamine
neurotransmitters, and this may account for how thyroid
hormones enhance antidepressant action in some patients.
Augmentation of treatments for either unipolar or bipolar
depression with thyroid hormones has also fallen out of
favor in recent years.
Triple-Action Combo: SSRI/SNRI + NDRI

σ

S-ketamine

NMDA

σ

+

+

Figure 7-63 Esketamine. The R and S enantiomers of ketamine
are mirror images of each other; the exact pharmacology of the
R and S enantiomers and their active metabolites is still being
determined. The S enantiomer of ketamine has been developed
and marketed as esketamine.

Buspirone

Buspirone is a 5HT1A partial agonist, so putting it
together with an SSRI/SNRI is very much similar to the
use of vilazodone (Figure 7-22 through Figure 7-27)
or vortioxetine (Figure 7-49) discussed above. Indeed,
most of the serotonin/dopamine agents used to augment
monoamine antidepressants have 5HT1A properties (e.g.,
quetiapine, aripiprazole, brexpiprazole, and cariprazine).
Administering drugs that have 5HT1A agonist actions is a
favored approach for augmenting SSRI/SNRIs, but using
buspirone for this is less common today than using other
agents with 5HT1A properties.
Thyroid Hormones

Thyroid hormones act by binding to nuclear ligand
receptors to form a nuclear ligand-activated transcription
factor. Abnormalities in thyroid hormone levels have
long been associated with depression, and various forms
and doses of thyroid hormones have for many years been
utilized as augmenting agents to drugs for depression
either to boost their efficacy in patients with inadequate
response or to speed up their onset of action. Thyroid’s

If boosting one neurotransmitter is good, and two is
better, maybe three boosted neurotransmitters is best
(Figures 7-64). Triple action (i.e, serotonin, dopamine,
and norepinephrine) drugs for depression therapy with
modulation of all three monoamines would be predicted
to occur by combining either an SSRI with an NDRI or
combining an SNRI with an NDRI, providing even more
noradrenergic and dopaminergic action (Figure 7-64).
These are perhaps some of the most popular combinations
of two drugs for depression utilized in the US.
California Rocket Fuel: SNRI plus Mirtazapine

This potentially powerful combination exploits the
pharmacological synergy attained by adding the enhanced
serotonin and norepinephrine release from inhibition of both
serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake by an SNRI to the
disinhibition of both serotonin and norepinephrine release
by the α2 antagonist actions of mirtazapine (Figure 7-65). It
is even possible that additional pro-dopaminergic actions
result from the combination of norepinephrine reuptake
blockade in the prefrontal cortex due to SNRIs with 5HT2C
actions of mirtazapine disinhibiting dopamine release. This
combination can provide very powerful antidepressant action
for some patients with unipolar major depressive episodes.
Arousal Combos

The frequent complaints of residual fatigue; loss of
energy, motivation, and sex drive; and problems
concentrating/problems with alertness may be
approached by combining either a stimulant (dopamine
transport inhibitor or DAT inhibitor) with an SNRI,
or modafinil (another DAT inhibitor) with an SNRI
(Figure 7-66), to recruit triple monoamine action and
especially enhancement of dopamine.
Second-Line Monotherapies Used for TreatmentResistant Depression
Tricyclic Antidepressants

The tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs) (Table 7-2;
Figure 7-67) were so-named because their chemical
333

7




<<<PAGE 551>>>

Chapter 12: Dementia: Causes, Symptomatic Treatments, and the Neurotransmitter Network Acetylcholine

inconclusive in terms of their efficacy in treating major
depressive disorder in dementia; however, SSRIs (e.g.,
citalopram but has QT prolongation; escitalopram may
have similar efficacy without QT prolongation) may
have some additional applicability towards ameliorating
agitation and inappropriate behaviors in patients with
dementia. Although considered relatively tolerable, SSRIs
may be associated with increased falls and osteoporosis,
and they may have interactions with other medications.
Additionally, SSRIs may worsen some symptoms of
Parkinson’s disease such as restless leg syndrome, periodic
limb movements, and REM sleep behavior disorders.
Therefore, if a trial of an SSRI (or any other antidepressant
medication) is deemed necessary, the lowest effective dose
should be used and continuous monitoring should be
exercised.
Another agent for treating depression in dementia
is trazodone, which blocks the serotonin transporter at
antidepressant doses (see Chapter 7 and Figures 7-44
and 7-45). Trazodone also has serotonin 2A and 2C,
H1 histamine and α1-adrenergic antagonist properties
(Figures 7-44 and 7-45), which can make it very sedating.
At low doses, trazodone does not adequately block
serotonin reuptake but retains its other properties (Figure
7-46). Because trazodone has a relatively short half-life

Treating Depression

May be ineffective because...

Pharmacological
Interventions

(6–8 hours), if dosed only once daily at night, particularly
at low doses, it can improve sleep without having daytime
effects. The utility of trazodone in treating secondary
behavioral symptoms in patients with dementia may lie
more in its ability to improve sleep rather than depression.
Trazodone may also improve other behavioral symptoms
of dementia especially in FTD but not particularly in AD.
Vortioxetine (Chapter 7 and Figure 7-49) in particular
may improve cognitive function in depression, especially
processing speed (Figure 7-50) as can some SNRIs like
duloxetine (Figure 7-29) in the elderly with depression.
However, these pro-cognitive effects have not been
demonstrated specifically in dementia patients who have
depression.
Pseudobulbar Affect (Pathological Laughing and
Crying)

Pseudobulbar affect (PBA) is an emotional expression
disorder, characterized by uncontrolled crying or
laughing that may be disproportionate or inappropriate
to the social context. It is often mistaken for a mood
disorder but is actually a disorder of the expression of
affect, which is inconsistent or disproportionate to mood.
PBA can accompany a variety of neurodegenerative
diseases such as AD and various other dementias,

Figure 12-50 Treating depression in
patients with dementia. The treatment
of depression in elderly patients with
dementia may be complicated by the
fact that the neural circuits acted on
by pharmacological interventions for
depression may have degenerated.
Although psychosocial interventions
are an appropriate option, they may be
difficult to implement for cognitively
impaired individuals.

acting on neural circuits which
may be degenerated

12

Psychosocial
Interventions

striving to change cognitive
functioning in cognitively
impaired individual

535




<<<PAGE 603>>>

Suggested Reading and Selected References

BALANCE investigators and collaborators, et al. (2010)
Lithium plus valproate combination therapy versus
monotherapy for relapse prevention in bipolar I disorder
(BALANCE): a randomized open-label trial. Lancet 375:
385–95.
Baldessarini RJ, Tondo L, Vazquez GH (2019) Pharmacological
treatment of adult bipolar disorder. Mol Psychiatry 24:
198–217.
Bang-Andersen B, Ruhland T, Jorgensen M, et al. (2011)
Discovery of 1-[2-(2,4-dimethylphenylsulfanyl)phenyl]
piperazine (LuAA21004): a novel multimodal compound
for the treatment of major depressive disorder. J Med Chem
54: 3206–21.
Carhart-Harris RL, Bolstridge M, Day CMG, et al.
(2018) Psilocybin with psychological support for
treatment-resistant depression: six month follow up.
Psychopharmacology 235: 399–408.
Carhart-Harris RL, Bolstridge M, Rucker J, et al. (2016)
Psilocybin with psychological support for treatment
resistant depression: an open label feasibility study. Lancet
Psychiatry 3: 619–27.
Carhart-Harris RL, Goodwin GM (2017) The therapeutic
potential of psychedelic drugs: past, present and future,
Neuropsychopharmacology 42: 2105–13.
Carhart-Harris RL, Leech R, Williams TM, et al. (2012)
Implications for psychedelic assisted psychotherapy:
a functional magnetic resonance imaging study
with psilocybin. Br J Psychiatry: doi:10.1192/bjp.
bp.111.103309.
Chiu CT, Chuan DM (2010) Molecular actions and therapeutic
potential of lithium in preclinical and clinical studies of
CNS disorders. Pharmacol Ther 128: 281–304.
Cipriani A, Pretty H, Hawton K, Geddes JR (2005) Lithium in
the prevention of suicidal behavior and all-cause mortality
in patients with mood disorders: a systematic review of
randomized trials. Am J Psychiatry 162: 1805–19.
Frye MA, Grunze H, Suppes T, et al. (2007) A placebocontrolled evaluation of adjunctive modafinil in the
treatment of bipolar depression. Am J Psychiatry 164:
1242–9.
Grady M, Stahl SM (2012) Practical guide for prescribing
MAOI: Debunking myths and removing barriers. CNS
Spectrums 17: 2–10.
Mork A, Pehrson A, Brennum LT, et al. (2012)
Pharmacological effects of Lu AA21004: a novel
multimodal compound for the treatment of major
depressive disorder. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 340: 666–75.
Pasquali L, Busceti CL, Fulceri F, Paparelli A, Fornai F (2010)
Intracellular pathways underlying the effects of lithium.
Behav Pharmacol 21: 473–92.

Perlis RH, Ostacher MJ, Goldberg JF, et al. (2010) Transition
to mania during treatment of bipolar depression.
Neuropsychopharmacology 35: 2545–52.
Pompili M, Vazquez GH, Forte A, Morrissette DA, Stahl
SM (2020) Pharmacological treatment of mixed
states. Psychiatr Clin N Am 43: 157–86. doi:10.1016/j.
psc.2019.10.015
Schwartz TL, Siddiqui US, Stahl SM (2011) Vilazodone: a
brief pharmacologic and clinical review of the novel SPARI
(serotonin partial agonist and reuptake inhibitor). Ther
Adv Psychopharmacol 1: 81–7.
Settimo L, Taylor D (2018) Evaluating the dose-dependent
mechanism of action of trazodone by estimation of
occupancies for different brain neurotransmitter targets. J
Psychopharmacol 32: 960104.
Stahl SM (2009) Mechanism of action of trazodone: a
multifunctional drug. CNS Spectrums 14: 536–46.
Stahl SM (2012) Psychotherapy as an epigenetic “drug”:
psychiatric therapeutics target symptoms linked to
malfunctioning brain circuits with psychotherapy as well
as with drugs. J Clin Pharm Ther 37: 249–53.
Stahl SM (2014) Mechanism of action of the SPARI
vilazodone: (serotonin partial agonist reuptake inhibitor).
CNS Spectrums 19: 105–9.
Stahl SM (2014) Mechanism of action of agomelatine:
a novel antidepressant exploiting synergy between
monoaminergic and melatonergic properties. CNS
Spectrums 19: 207–12.
Stahl SM (2015) Modes and nodes explain the mechanism
of action of vortioxetine, a multimodal agent (MMA):
enhancing serotonin release by combining serotonin
(5HT) transporter inhibition with actions at 5HT receptors
(5HT1A, 5HT1B, 5HT1D, 5HT7 receptors). CNS Spectrums
20: 93–7.
Stahl SM (2015) Modes and nodes explain the mechanism of
action of vortioxetine, multimodal agent (MMA): actions
at serotonin receptors may enhance downstream release of
four pro-cognitive neurotransmitters. CNS Spectrums 20:
515–19.
Stahl SM, Fava M, Trivedi M (2010) Agomelatine in the
treatment of major depressive disorder: an 8 week,
multicenter, randomized, placebo-controlled trial. J Clin
Psychiatry 71: 616–26.
Undurraga J, Baldessarini RJ, Valenti M, et al. (2012) Bipolar
depression: clinical correlates of receiving antidepressants.
J Affect Disord 139: 89–93.
Zajecka J, Schatzberg A, Stahl SM, et al. (2010) Efficacy and
safety of agomelatine in the treatment of major depressive
disorder: a multicenter, randomized, double-blind, placebocontrolled trial. J Clin Psychopharmacol 30: 135–44.

587


