<<<PAGE 71>>>

Chapter 3: Ion Channels

Table 3-2 Key ligand-gated ion channels directly targeted by psychotropic drugs

Neurotransmitter

Ligand-gated ion
channel receptor
subtype directly
targeted

Pharmacological
action

Drug class

Therapeutic
action

Acetylcholine

Alpha4 Beta2
nicotinic

Partial agonist

Nicotinic receptor
partial agonist (NRPA)
(varenicline)

Smoking cessation

GABAA
benzodiazepine
receptors

Full agonist,
phasic inhibition

Benzodiazepines

Anxiolytic

GABAA nonbenzodiazepine
PAM sites

Full agonist,
phasic inhibition

“Z DRUGS”/hypnotics
(zolpidem, zaleplon,
zopiclone, eszopiclone)

Improves insomnia

GABAA neurosteroid
sites
(benzodiazepine
insensitive)

Full agonist,
tonic inhibition

Neuroactive steroids
(allopregnanolone)

Postpartum depression
Rapid-acting
antidepressant
Anesthetic

NMDA
NAM channel sites/
Mg++ sites

Antagonist

NMDA glutamate
antagonist (memantine)

Pro-cognitive in
Alzheimer disease

NMDA openchannel sites

Antagonist

PCP/phencyclidine
Ketamine
Dextromethorphan
Dextromethadone

Dissociative
hallucinogen
Anesthetic
Pseudobulbar affect
Agitation in Alzheimer
disease
Rapid-acting
antidepressant
Treatment-resistant
depression

5HT3

Antagonist

Mirtazapine
Vortioxetine

Pro-cognitive
Antidepressant

5HT3

Antagonist

Anti-emetic

Reduce
chemotherapyinduced emesis

GABA

Glutamate

Serotonin

3

PAM, positive allosteric modulator; NAM, negative allosteric modulator; NMDA, N-methyl-D-aspartate; Mg, magnesium.

ion channels (Figure 3-3) are analogous to pentameric
subtypes of ion channels (Figure 3-2A), but just have four
subunits rather than five. Receptor sites are in various
locations on each of the subunits; some binding sites are
in the channel, but many are present at different locations
outside the channel.
This tetrameric structure is typical of the ionotropic
glutamate receptors known as AMPA (α-amino-3hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazole-propionic acid), kainate,

and NMDA (N-methyl-D-aspartate) subtypes (Table 3-3).
Drugs that act directly at tetrameric ionotropic glutamate
receptors are listed in Table 3-2. Receptor subtypes for
glutamate according to the selective agonist acting at that
receptor as well as the specific molecular subunits that
comprise that subtype are listed in Table 3-3. Subtype
selective drugs for ionotropic glutamate receptors are
under investigation but not currently used in clinical
practice.

55




<<<PAGE 214>>>

STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

to be that sedation is both good and bad in the treatment
of psychosis. In some cases, particularly for short-term
treatment, sedation is a desired therapeutic effect,
especially early in treatment, during hospitalization,
and when patients are aggressive, agitated, or needing
sleep induction. In other cases, particularly for longterm treatment, sedation is generally a side effect to
be avoided because diminished arousal, sedation,
and somnolence can lead to cognitive impairment.
When cognition is impaired, functional outcomes are
compromised. The pharmacology of sedation is discussed
above and illustrated in Figures 5-8, 5-13, and 5-14 for
anticholinergic, antihistamine, and α1 antagonist actions.
Sedative hypnotics are discussed in Chapter 10 on sleep,
and aggression and violence are discussed in Chapter 13
on impulsivity.
Cardiometabolic Actions

Although all D2/5HT2A/5HT1A drugs for treating
psychosis share a class warning for causing weight gain
and risks for obesity, dyslipidemia, and hyperglycemia/
diabetes mellitus, there is actually a spectrum of risk
among the various agents:
high metabolic risk: clozapine, olanzapine
moderate metabolic risk: risperidone, paliperidone,
quetiapine, asenapine, iloperidone
low metabolic risk: lurasidone, cariprazine,
lumateperone, ziprasidone, pimavanserin,
aripiprazole, brexpiprazole
The “metabolic highway” shown schematically in
Figure 5-23 passes by weight gain, dyslipidemia, and
hyperglycemia/diabetes mellitus and ends with the sad
destination of premature death. The point of discussing
the metabolic highway is to monitor the patient along their
journey of taking one of the moderate- or high-risk agents,
and to intervene when possible to prevent predictable
adverse outcomes. The onramp to the metabolic highway
is increased appetite and weight gain, with progression
to obesity, insulin resistance, and dyslipidemia with
increases in fasting triglyceride levels (Figure 5-23).
Ultimately, hyperinsulinemia advances to pancreatic β-cell
failure, prediabetes, and then diabetes. Once diabetes
is established, risk for cardiovascular events is further
increased, as is the risk of premature death (Figure 5-23).
The pharmacological mechanisms for what propels a
patient taking a drug with antipsychotic properties along
the metabolic highway to these risks and beyond are
only beginning to be understood. Increased weight gain
associated with some agents may be due to actions at the
198

H1 histamine receptor and the 5HT2C serotonin receptor.
When these receptors are blocked, particularly at the
same time, patients can experience weight gain. Since
weight gain can lead to obesity, and obesity to diabetes,
and diabetes to cardiac disease along the metabolic
highway (Figure 5-23), it seemed feasible at first that
weight gain might explain all the other cardiometabolic
complications associated with treatment with those
drugs used for psychosis that cause moderate or high
amounts of weight gain. This may be true, but only in
part, and perhaps mostly for those agents that have both
potent antihistamine properties as well as potent 5HT2C
antagonist properties; notably, clozapine, olanzapine,
and quetiapine, as well as the antidepressant mirtazapine
(discussed in Chapter 7).
However, it now appears that the cardiometabolic
risk cannot simply be explained by increased appetite
and weight gain, nor by antagonist actions at these
two receptors, even though they certainly do represent
the first steps down the slippery slope towards
cardiometabolic complications for some of the higher-risk
agents. However, many drugs that block one or another
of these two receptors do not have a great deal of appetite
or weight gain associated with use, and many other drugs
that cause weight gain lack actions at these two receptors.
It appears that there may be a second mechanism
acting to cause weight gain, dyslipidemia, and diabetes;
namely, immediate increase in insulin resistance.
This can be measured in part by elevation of fasting
triglyceride levels and cannot be explained by weight gain
alone, because this occurs prior to gaining significant
weight; it is as if there is an acute receptor-mediated
action of these drugs on insulin regulation. We still do not
know what that receptor might be, but it is hypothesized
as receptor “X” on the drug icon in Figure 5-24.
So, there appears to be a second mechanism of
metabolic dysfunction other than that which causes
increased appetite and weight gain of the H1/5HT2Cmediated mechanism. This outcome was unexpected
when these drugs were all developed, and some drugs
seem to have this second mechanism (high- and
moderate-risk agents) while others seem to lack it (lowrisk agents). To date, the mechanism of this increased
insulin resistance and elevation of fasting triglycerides
has been vigorously pursued but has not yet been
identified. The rapid elevation of fasting triglycerides
upon initiation of some D2/5HT2A antagonists, and the
rapid fall of fasting triglycerides upon discontinuation
of such drugs, is highly suggestive that an unknown




<<<PAGE 248>>>

STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

5HT2A

α1

sertindole
C

5HT2

5HT6

D2

5HT2A

++++

5HT2C

D2

5HT6

α1

+++

+++

+++

+++ ++ ++ ++ ++ ++

D4

D1

5HT7 5HT1D 5HT1B

DAT 5HT1F 5HT1E α2B α2C 5HT1A M1

α2A

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

Figure 5-60 Sertindole’s pharmacological and binding profile. This figure portrays a qualitative consensus of current thinking about
the binding properties of sertindole. Potent antagonist actions at α1 receptors may account for some of sertindole’s side effects. As
with all agents discussed in this chapter, binding properties vary greatly with technique and from one laboratory to another; they are
constantly being revised and updated.

psychosis. Quetiapine causes virtually no motor side effects
nor prolactin elevations. However, quetiapine has at least
moderate risk for weight gain and metabolic disturbances.
Asenapine

Asenapine (Figure 5-47) has a chemical structure related
to the antidepressant mirtazapine and shares several
of mirtazapine’s pharmacological binding properties,
especially 5HT2A, 5HT2C, H1, and α2 antagonism, plus
many other properties that mirtazapine does not have,
especially D2 antagonism, as well as actions upon many
232

additional serotonin receptor subtypes (Figure 5-47).
This suggests that asenapine would have antidepressant
actions, but only antipsychotic/antimanic actions have
been proven. Asenapine is unusual in that it is given as
a sublingual formulation, because it is not absorbed if
it is swallowed. The surface area of the oral cavity for
oral absorption limits the size of the dose, so asenapine
is generally taken twice a day despite a long half-life.
Since asenapine is rapidly absorbed sublingually with
rapid peak drug levels, unlike other formulations that
simply dissolve rapidly in the mouth but are followed




<<<PAGE 309>>>

Chapter 7: Treatments for Mood Disorders

If blockade of SERT explains the shared clinical and
pharmacological actions of SSRIs, what explains their
differences? Although there is no generally accepted
explanation that accounts for the commonly observed
clinical phenomena of different efficacy and tolerability
of various SSRIs in individual patients, it makes sense to
consider those unique pharmacological characteristics
of the six SSRIs that are not shared with each other as
candidates to explain the broad range of individual
patient reactions to different SSRIs (Figures 7-16 through
7-21). Each SSRI has secondary pharmacological actions
other than SERT blockade, and no two SSRIs have
identical secondary pharmacological characteristics.
Whether these secondary binding profiles can account for
the differences in efficacy and tolerability in individual
patients remains to be proven. However, it does lead to
provocative hypothesis generation and gives a rational
basis for psychopharmacologists trying more than one of
these agents rather than thinking “they are all the same.”
Sometimes only an empiric trial of different SSRIs will
lead to the best match of drug to an individual patient.
Fluoxetine: An SSRI with 5HT2C Antagonist Properties

In addition to serotonin reuptake inhibition, fluoxetine
also has 5HT2C antagonist actions that may explain
many of its unique clinical properties (Figure 7-16).
5HT2C antagonism may contribute to its antidepressant
actions and also to its efficacy in other disorders,
especially in eating disorders. Other drugs for unipolar

fluoxetine
5HT2C

NET

SERT
SERT

Figure 7-16 Fluoxetine. In addition to serotonin reuptake
inhibition, fluoxetine has norepinephrine reuptake inhibition
(NRI) and serotonin 2C antagonist actions (5HT2C). 5HT2C
antagonism can lead to disinhibition of norepinephrine and
dopamine; this action may be responsible for fluoxetine’s
activating effects. NRI may be clinically relevant only at very high
doses.

depression with 5HT2C antagonist properties include
trazodone, mirtazapine, agomelatine, and some tricyclic
antidepressants, and these will be described below.
Finally, two serotonin 2A/dopamine 2 antagonists,
quetiapine (Figure 5-45) and olanzapine (Figure 5-44),
also have potent 5HT2C antagonist properties. Both
agents are used to treat psychosis (see Chapter 5) but are
also approved for augmenting other drugs for unipolar
depression, treatment-resistant unipolar depression,
and bipolar depression. Blocking serotonin action at
5HT2C receptors disinhibits (i.e., enhances) release of
both norepinephrine and dopamine, actions theoretically
beneficial for the treatment of depression (see Chapter
6 and Figure 6-24B and also the discussion below on
agomelatine).
The good news about 5HT2C antagonism may be
that it is generally activating, and the reason why
many patients, even from the first dose, detect an
energizing and fatigue-reducing effect of fluoxetine, with
improvement in concentration and attention as well. This
mechanism is perhaps best matched to depressed patients
with reduced positive affect (Figure 6-41), hypersomnia,
psychomotor retardation, apathy, and fatigue. Fluoxetine
is also approved in some countries in combination with
olanzapine for treatment-resistant unipolar depression
and for bipolar depression. Since olanzapine also has
5HT2C antagonist actions (Figure 5-44), it may be that
adding the 5HT2C antagonist actions of olanzapine to
those of fluoxetine could theoretically lead to further
enhanced dopamine and norepinephrine release in
the cortex to mediate the antidepressant actions of this
combination. 5HT2C antagonism may also contribute
to the anti-bulimia effect of higher doses of fluoxetine,
the only SSRI approved for the treatment of this eating
disorder. The bad news could be that 5HT2C antagonist
actions of fluoxetine may contribute to this agent being
sometimes less well matched to patients with agitation,
insomnia, and anxiety, who may experience unwanted
activation and even a panic attack if given an agent that
further activates them.
Fluoxetine also has weak norepinephrine reuptake
blocking properties (Figure 7-16), which may become
clinically relevant at very high doses. Fluoxetine has
a long half-life (2–3 days), and its active metabolite
an even longer half-life (2 weeks). The long halflife is advantageous in that it seems to reduce the
withdrawal reactions that are characteristic of sudden
discontinuation of some SSRIs, but it also means that
it takes a long time to clear the drug and its active

293

7




<<<PAGE 324>>>

STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

5HT2C receptors fluctuate in a circadian manner in the
SCN, with high receptor expression at night/dark and low
receptor expression in the day/light. That makes sense
since melatonin is only secreted at night in the dark (see
Chapter 6 and Figures 6-35 and 6-36B). In some patients
with unipolar depression, however, circadian rhythms
are “out of synch,” including low melatonin secretion at
night among numerous other changes. Theoretically,
agomelatine, by stimulating melatonin receptors in the
SCN and simultaneously blocking 5HT2C receptors there

as well, appears to resynchronize circadian rhythms,
reverse the phase delay of depression, and thereby exert
an antidepressant effect (Figure 7-39).
Mirtazapine

Mirtazapine (Figure 7-40) is marketed worldwide and, unlike
almost every other drug for unipolar depression, it
does not block any monoamine transporter. Instead,
mirtazapine is a multifunctional drug with five principal
mechanisms of action: 5HT2A, 5HT2C, 5HT3, α2-adrenergic,

NE

DA

agomelatine
VTA LC

retinohypothalamic
tract
SCN

pineal
gland

Healthy Control
Depression
sleep
11 pm 7 am

7 am

sleep
11 pm 7 am

Figure 7-39 Agomelatine may resynchronize circadian rhythms. Agomelatine, which acts as an agonist at melatonin 1 and 2 receptors,
may resynchronize circadian rhythms by acting as “substitute melatonin.” Thus, even in the absence of melatonin production in the
pineal gland, agomelatine can stimulate melatonin 1 and 2 receptors in the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) to reset circadian rhythms.
5HT2C receptors are also present in the SCN and blocked by agomelatine. In addition, by blocking 5HT2C receptors in the ventral
tegmental area (VTA) and locus coeruleus (LC), agomelatine promotes dopamine (DA) and norepinephrine (NE) release in the prefrontal
cortex.
α
1

α
2A

α
2A

H
1

H
1

mirtazapine
(NaSSA)

5HT2A

2C

2C

5HT

T3
5H

T3

5HT

5H

308

mianserin
mianserin

5HT2A

Figure 7-40 Mirtazapine and
mianserin. Mirtazapine’s primary
therapeutic action is α2 antagonism.
It also blocks three serotonin (5HT)
receptors: 5HT2A, 5HT2C, and 5HT3.
Finally, it blocks histamine 1 (H1)
receptors. Mianserin has a similar
binding profile to mirtazapine, the only
difference being additional effects at α1
receptors. NaSSA: noradrenergic and
specific serotonergic antidepressant.




<<<PAGE 325>>>

Chapter 7: Treatments for Mood Disorders

and H1 histamine antagonism. Two other α2 antagonists
are marketed as drugs for depression in some countries
(but not the US), namely mianserin (worldwide except US)
and setiptiline (Japan). Unlike mirtazapine, mianserin also
has potent α1 antagonist properties, which tend to mitigate
its ability to enhance serotonergic neurotransmission so
that this drug enhances predominantly noradrenergic
neurotransmission, yet with associated 5HT2A, 5HT2C,
5HT3, and H1 antagonist properties (Figure 7-40).
Clinical consequences of blocking H1 receptors
have been discussed in Chapter 5 and illustrated in
Figure 5-13A, showing that H1 antagonist actions are
associated with sedation and weight gain. 5HT2A antagonist
properties also have been discussed in Chapter 5 and
illustrated in Figures 5-16 and 5-17, showing increases in
downstream release of dopamine in the prefrontal cortex,
potentially associated with antidepressant actions. 5HT2A
antagonism also improves sleep, especially slow-wave sleep,
which can be helpful in many depressed patients. 5HT2C
antagonist actions were just explained in the preceding
section and illustrated in Figure 7-38, showing enhanced
release of norepinephrine and dopamine in the prefrontal
cortex, which would theoretically improve depression.
Here we explain the other actions of mirtazapine, notably
α2 antagonist actions and 5HT3 antagonist actions. Some
other drugs for unipolar depression also have potent α2
antagonist actions (Figure 5-35), including brexpiprazole
(Figure 5-57) and quetiapine (Figure 5-45). Some other
drugs for bipolar depression also have α2 antagonist
actions, including quetiapine (Figure 5-45) and lurasidone
(Figure 5-53). Another agent for treatment of unipolar
depression that has potent 5HT3 antagonist properties is
vortioxetine, discussed below.
Alpha-2 Antagonist Action

Alpha-2 antagonism is another way to enhance the
release of monoamines and exert an antidepressant
action in unipolar depression. Recall that norepinephrine
turns off its own release by interacting with presynaptic
α2 autoreceptors on noradrenergic neurons (discussed in
Chapter 6 and illustrated in Figures 6-14 through 6-16;
see also Figure 7-41A and B on the right). Therefore,
when an α2 antagonist is administered, norepinephrine
can no longer turn off its own release and noradrenergic
neurons are thus disinhibited from their axon terminals,
such as those in the raphe and in the cortex as shown in
Figure 7-41C on the right.
The general principle of serotonin turning off
serotonin release at serotonin 5HT1B autoreceptors
(Figure 4-41 and Figure 7-41A compared to 7-41B on

the left) has already been discussed and is illustrated
again here. However, there are also α2 “hetero” receptors
on serotonin neurons (Figure 7-41A, B, C on the left).
There are many cases where neurotransmitter release is
controlled not only by their “own” autoreceptor, but also
by presynaptic receptors for “another” neurotransmitter
at heteroreceptors (Figure 7-41A; see also Figure 4-45
and discussion of presynaptic 5HT1B heteroreceptors on
norepinephrine, dopamine, histamine, and acetylcholine
neurons). The same phenomenon is shown in Figure
7-41B where not only is serotonin turning off serotonin
release at its own 5HT1B presynaptic autoreceptor on
the left hand part of the serotonin neuron, but also
norepinephrine migrating from a norepinephrine
terminal is turning off serotonin release via an α2
presynaptic heteroreceptor on the right hand part of the
serotonin neuron. Norepinephrine is also turning off its
own release via an α2 presynaptic receptor (Figure 7-41B
on the right at the norepinephrine neuron). This sets up
the situation whereby an α2 antagonist can have a dual
effect, facilitating the release of both norepinephrine and
serotonin (Figure 7-41C). Not only does α2 antagonism
disinhibit norepinephrine release (Figure 7-41C on the
right), it also disinhibits serotonin release (Figure 7-41C
on the left). Thus, α2 antagonism causes dual 5HT–NE
action. This is something like the same net outcome as
an SNRI but by an entirely different mechanism. Rather
than blocking serotonin and norepinephrine presynaptic
transporters, α2 antagonism “cuts the brake cable” of
noradrenergic inhibition (NE stepping on the brake to
prevent 5HT and NE release shown in Figure 7-41B is
blocked in Figure 7-41C).
These two mechanisms, monoamine transport
blockade and α2 antagonism, are synergistic, so
that blocking them simultaneously gives a much
more powerful disinhibitory signal to these two
neurotransmitters than if only one mechanism is blocked.
For this reason, the α2 antagonist mirtazapine is often
combined with SNRIs for treatment of cases that do
not respond to an SNRI alone. This combination of
mirtazapine with an SNRI is sometimes called “California
rocket fuel” because of the potentially powerful drugs
for depression blasting the patient out of the depths of
depression.
5HT3 Antagonist Action

The 5HT3 receptors best known to clinicians are perhaps
those localized in the chemoreceptor trigger zone of the
brainstem, where they mediate nausea and vomiting,
especially in response to cancer chemotherapy, and
309

7




<<<PAGE 327>>>

Chapter 7: Treatments for Mood Disorders

also those localized in the gastrointestinal tract itself,
where they mediate nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea/
bowel motility when stimulated by serotonin, including
when stimulated by serotonin that is a side effect of
peripherally increased serotonin by SSRIs/SNRIs.
Blocking these 5HT3 receptors can therefore protect
against chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting
as well as against serotonin-induced gastrointestinal
side effects that can accompany agents that increase
serotonin.
More important to the mechanism of action of central
5HT3 antagonists such as mirtazapine and vortioxetine
in the treatment of unipolar depression are the 5HT3
receptors in the brain that regulate the release of
various neurotransmitters downstream in some brain
circuits that mediate the symptoms of depression. 5HT3
receptors in the brain are usually localized on GABA
(γ-aminobutyric acid) interneurons, and they are always
excitatory. This means that when serotonin stimulates a
5HT3 receptor, it causes GABA to inhibit whatever neuron
is downstream from it. This was shown for 5HT3–GABA
interactions at glutamate neurons (Figure 4-49) and
at acetylcholine and norepinephrine neurons (Figure
4-48). 5HT3 antagonism is a powerful disinhibitor of
glutamate release (Figure 7-42) and of acetylcholine and
norepinephrine (Figure 7-43), actions that theoretically
release neurotransmitters downstream to have
antidepressant action.
Serotonin Antagonist/Reuptake Inhibitors (SARIs)

The prototype drug that blocks serotonin 2A and 2C
receptors as well as serotonin reuptake is trazodone,
classified as a serotonin antagonist/reuptake inhibitor
(SARI) (Figure 7-44). Nefazodone is another SARI with
robust 5HT2A antagonist actions and weaker 5HT2C
antagonism and SERT inhibition, but is no longer
commonly used because of rare liver toxicity (Figure
7-44). Trazodone is a very interesting agent, since it acts
like two different drugs, depending upon the dose and
the formulation. We discussed a very similar situation in
Chapter 5 for quetiapine (Figure 5-46).
A more complete picture of trazodone’s binding
properties has emerged from recent studies (Figures 7-44
and 7-45) and reflects that it is a serotonin antagonist
not just at 5HT2A and 5HT2C receptors, but also at 5HT1D,
5HT2B, and 5HT7 receptors. In addition, trazodone has
potent antagonist properties at α1B, α1A, α2C, and α2B
receptors, H1 histamine receptors, and agonist actions at
5HT1A receptors (Figure 7-45). Because of these various
pharmacological actions occur with varying potencies,

it means that trazodone will act predominantly via its
highest-affinity receptor interactions at low doses, and
will recruit its lower-affinity receptor actions at higher
doses.
Different Drug at Different Doses and at Different
Delivery Rates?

Trazodone is famous for its effectiveness and utility at
low doses as a hypnotic (Figure 7-46). That is, doses of
trazodone lower than those effective for antidepressant
action are quite frequently used for insomnia. Hypnotic
doses engage the receptors for which trazodone has
the highest affinity and, amongst these, blockade is
hypothetically linked to hypnotic actions (i.e., 5HT2A,
α1 subtypes, and H1). Blocking 5HT2A receptors
enhances slow-wave sleep, and blocking α1 subtypes
and H1 receptors interferes with monoamine arousal
mechanisms (discussed in Chapter 5 and illustrated in
Figures 5-13 and 5-14). The best way to deliver a hypnotic
is with a standard oral formulation that is immediate in
onset, peaks quickly, and is out of the system by morning.
Since insomnia is one of the most frequent residual
symptoms of depression after treatment with an SSRI/
SNRI (discussed earlier in this chapter and illustrated in
Figure 7-5), addition of a hypnotic is often necessary in
treating patients with a major depressive episode. Not
only can addition of a hypnotic potentially relieve the
insomnia itself, it may also increase remission rates due
to improvement of other symptoms such as loss of energy
and depressed mood (Figure 7-5). Thus, the ability of low
doses of trazodone to improve sleep in depressed patients
has led to its popular use at low doses as an augmenting
option for residual insomnia that persists after treatment
with SSRIs/SNRIs.
The original oral formulation of trazodone used for
depression was short in duration, required multiple daily
doses higher than hypnotic doses (Figure 7-47), and was
associated with peak dose sedation after daytime doses,
not an ideal profile for a drug for unipolar depression.
Although trazodone’s antidepressant actions at higher
doses are undisputed as well as its lack of causing sexual
dysfunction or weight gain, the presence of daytime
sedation makes using trazodone at antidepressant doses
in the standard oral formulation difficult in clinical
practice. However, a once-daily controlled-release
formulation with higher doses of trazodone is available
for use in depression, which blunts peak plasma drug
levels to reduce daytime sedation. These higher doses
recruit additional known antidepressant receptor actions,
including serotonin reuptake inhibition (Figures 7-10
311

7




<<<PAGE 349>>>

Chapter 7: Treatments for Mood Disorders

esketamine
NMDA

known abilities to regulate neuronal organization,
arborization, and synapse formation may have the
downstream consequence of boosting monoamine
neurotransmitters, and this may account for how thyroid
hormones enhance antidepressant action in some patients.
Augmentation of treatments for either unipolar or bipolar
depression with thyroid hormones has also fallen out of
favor in recent years.
Triple-Action Combo: SSRI/SNRI + NDRI

σ

S-ketamine

NMDA

σ

+

+

Figure 7-63 Esketamine. The R and S enantiomers of ketamine
are mirror images of each other; the exact pharmacology of the
R and S enantiomers and their active metabolites is still being
determined. The S enantiomer of ketamine has been developed
and marketed as esketamine.

Buspirone

Buspirone is a 5HT1A partial agonist, so putting it
together with an SSRI/SNRI is very much similar to the
use of vilazodone (Figure 7-22 through Figure 7-27)
or vortioxetine (Figure 7-49) discussed above. Indeed,
most of the serotonin/dopamine agents used to augment
monoamine antidepressants have 5HT1A properties (e.g.,
quetiapine, aripiprazole, brexpiprazole, and cariprazine).
Administering drugs that have 5HT1A agonist actions is a
favored approach for augmenting SSRI/SNRIs, but using
buspirone for this is less common today than using other
agents with 5HT1A properties.
Thyroid Hormones

Thyroid hormones act by binding to nuclear ligand
receptors to form a nuclear ligand-activated transcription
factor. Abnormalities in thyroid hormone levels have
long been associated with depression, and various forms
and doses of thyroid hormones have for many years been
utilized as augmenting agents to drugs for depression
either to boost their efficacy in patients with inadequate
response or to speed up their onset of action. Thyroid’s

If boosting one neurotransmitter is good, and two is
better, maybe three boosted neurotransmitters is best
(Figures 7-64). Triple action (i.e, serotonin, dopamine,
and norepinephrine) drugs for depression therapy with
modulation of all three monoamines would be predicted
to occur by combining either an SSRI with an NDRI or
combining an SNRI with an NDRI, providing even more
noradrenergic and dopaminergic action (Figure 7-64).
These are perhaps some of the most popular combinations
of two drugs for depression utilized in the US.
California Rocket Fuel: SNRI plus Mirtazapine

This potentially powerful combination exploits the
pharmacological synergy attained by adding the enhanced
serotonin and norepinephrine release from inhibition of both
serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake by an SNRI to the
disinhibition of both serotonin and norepinephrine release
by the α2 antagonist actions of mirtazapine (Figure 7-65). It
is even possible that additional pro-dopaminergic actions
result from the combination of norepinephrine reuptake
blockade in the prefrontal cortex due to SNRIs with 5HT2C
actions of mirtazapine disinhibiting dopamine release. This
combination can provide very powerful antidepressant action
for some patients with unipolar major depressive episodes.
Arousal Combos

The frequent complaints of residual fatigue; loss of
energy, motivation, and sex drive; and problems
concentrating/problems with alertness may be
approached by combining either a stimulant (dopamine
transport inhibitor or DAT inhibitor) with an SNRI,
or modafinil (another DAT inhibitor) with an SNRI
(Figure 7-66), to recruit triple monoamine action and
especially enhancement of dopamine.
Second-Line Monotherapies Used for TreatmentResistant Depression
Tricyclic Antidepressants

The tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs) (Table 7-2;
Figure 7-67) were so-named because their chemical
333

7




<<<PAGE 350>>>

STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Triple-Action Combos
SSRI + NDRI
= SSRI

5HT

NE

DA

single boost

single boost

single boost

= NDRI

SERT

NET

DAT

SSRI

NDRI

NDRI

A

SNRI + NDRI
= SNRI

5HT

NE

DA

single boost

double boost

single boost

= NDRI

B

SERT

NET

SNRI

NDRI

DAT
SNRI

NDRI

Figure 7-64 Triple-action combo: SSRI/SNRI plus NDRI. (A) Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) plus a norepinephrine–
dopamine reuptake inhibitor (NDRI) leads to a single boost for serotonin (5HT), norepinephrine (NE), and dopamine (DA). (B) Serotonin–
norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor (SNRI) plus a norepinephrine–dopamine reuptake inhibitor (NDRI) leads to a single boost for
serotonin (5HT), a double boost for norepinephrine (NE), and a single boost for dopamine (DA).

California Rocket Fuel
SNRI + mirtazapine
= SNRI

5HT

= mirtazapine

SNRI

quadruple 5HT
boost 5HT 2C

quadruple
boost
α2

SERT

DA

NE

SNRI

5HT
2C

α2 2A

5HT
2A

mirtazapine

mirtazapine

NET
mirtazapine

double boost

5HT 5HT
2A 2C
Figure 7-65 California rocket fuel: SNRI plus mirtazapine. Combining a serotonin–norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor (SNRI) with
mirtazapine is a combination that has a great degree of theoretical synergy: serotonin (5HT) is quadruple-boosted (with reuptake
blockade, α2 antagonism, 5HT2A antagonism, and 5HT2C antagonism), norepinephrine (NE) is quadruple-boosted (with reuptake
blockade, α2 antagonism, 5HT2A antagonism, and 5HT2C antagonism), and there may even be a double boost of dopamine (DA) (with
5HT2A and 5HT2C antagonism).

334




<<<PAGE 393>>>

Chapter 8: Anxiety, Trauma, and Treatment

briefly in Chapter 7 and illustrated in Figures 7-87 and
7-88. Ketamine is more extensively discussed in Chapter
7 as well. Future research is trying to determine how
to use psychotherapy to provoke emotional memories
and reactivate them by producing a state where a
pharmacological agent such as a hallucinogen producing
a dissociative state, including ketamine as well as
psilocybin or MDMA, could be administered to disrupt
reconsolidation of these emotional memories and thereby
relieve symptoms of anxiety, trauma, re-experiencing
and other emotional memories of PTSD and anxiety
disorders, and existential distress in terminally ill patients.
These are early days in terms of applying this concept
in clinical settings, but this notion supports the growing
idea that psychotherapy and psychopharmacology can be
synergistic. Much more needs to be learned as to how to
exploit this theoretical synergy.

TREATMENTS FOR ANXIETY
DISORDER SUBTYPES
Generalized Anxiety Disorder

Psychopharmacological treatments for generalized
anxiety disorder overlap greatly with those for
other anxiety disorders and depression and include
SSRIs, SNRIs, benzodiazepines, buspirone, and α2δ
ligands such as pregabalin and gabapentin. While
benzodiazepines should not be prescribed to a patient
with generalized anxiety disorder who is abusing other
substances, particularly alcohol, benzodiazepines can
be useful in patients who are not substance abusers
for short terms when initiating an SSRI or SNRI, since
these serotonergic agents are often activating, difficult
to tolerate early in dosing, and have a delayed onset
of action. In other patients, benzodiazepines can be
useful to “top up” an SSRI or SNRI for patients who
have experienced only partial relief of symptoms and
have stabilized on SSRI/SNRI therapy. Benzodiazepines
can also be useful for occasional intermittent use when
symptoms surge and sudden relief is needed. Alpha-2delta ligands are a good alternative to benzodiazepines
in some patients. These ligands are approved for the
treatment of anxiety in Europe and other countries
but not in the US, yet can be useful “off-label” as
augmenting agents.
Other “off-label” treatments for anxiety can
include mirtazapine, trazodone, vilazodone, tricyclic
antidepressants, or even sedating antihistamines such as
hydroxyzine.

Panic Disorder

Panic attacks occur in many conditions, not just panic
disorder, and panic disorder is frequently comorbid with
the other anxiety disorders and with major depression.
It is thus not surprising that contemporary treatments
for panic disorder overlap significantly with those for
the other anxiety disorders and with those for major
depression. Treatments include SSRIs and SNRIs, as
well as benzodiazepines, and α2δ ligands. “Off-label”
treatments of panic attacks in anxiety disorders can also
include mirtazapine and trazodone. The monoamine
oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs), discussed in Chapter 7, are
much neglected in psychopharmacology in general and
for the treatment of treatment-resistant panic disorder in
particular. However, MAOIs can have powerful efficacy
in panic and should be considered when other agents
fail. Cognitive behavioral psychotherapy is both an
alternative or an augmentation to psychopharmacological
approaches, and can help modify cognitive distortions,
and, through exposure, diminish phobic avoidance
behaviors.
Social Anxiety Disorder

The treatment options for this anxiety disorder are
very similar to those for panic disorder with a few
noteworthy differences. The SSRIs and SNRIs and α2δ
ligands are certainly useful treatments, but the utility
of benzodiazepine is not as widely accepted as it might
be for generalized anxiety disorder and panic disorder.
There is also less evidence for the utility of older drugs for
depression for use in social anxiety disorder. Beta blockers,
sometimes with benzodiazepines, can be useful for some
patients with very discrete types of social anxiety, such
as performance anxiety. One drug that is (unfortunately)
quite effective but obviously should not be used is alcohol
for the treatment of social anxiety symptoms. Many
patients of course are aware of this and abuse alcohol
before they seek safer and more effective treatment.
Cognitive behavioral psychotherapy can be a powerful
intervention, sometimes better than drugs for certain
patients, and often helpful in combination with drugs.
PTSD

Although some treatments such as certain SSRIs are
approved for PTSD, psychopharmacological treatments
for PTSD are not as effective as these same treatments are
in anxiety disorders. Also, PTSD is so highly comorbid
that many of the psychopharmacological treatments
are more effectively aimed at comorbidities such as

377

8




<<<PAGE 445>>>

Chapter 10: Disorders of Sleep and Wakefulness and Their Treatment

Figure 10-41C, D Pharmacokinetics
of hypnotics, part 2. (C) For hypnotics
with moderately long half-lives (15–30
hours), receptor occupancies above the
sleep threshold may not wear off until
after the individual needs to awaken,
potentially leading to “hangover”
effects (sedation, memory problems).
(D) For hypnotics with ultra-short halflives (1–3 hours), receptor occupancies
above the sleep threshold may not
last long enough, causing loss of sleep
maintenance.

Still Too Hot:

Moderately Long Half-Life Hypnotics
Do Not Wear Off Until After
Time to Awaken (Hangover)
5

4

drug
concentration 3

hangover, levels high after
time to awaken

2

relevant threshold

1

0

24

48

hours (taken nightly)

72

96

120

144

duration above threshold: 15-30 hours
examples: estazolam (ProSom)
temazepam (Restoril)
most TCAs
mirtazapine (Remeron)
chlorpromazine (Thorazine)

C

Too Cold:

Short Half-Life Hypnotics Wear Off
Before Time to Awaken
(Loss of Sleep Maintenance)
5

4

drug
concentration 3

loss of sleep maintenance
low levels before time
to awaken

2

relevant threshold

1

0

24

48

hours (taken nightly)
D

72

10

96
120
144
half-lives: 1-3 hours
examples: triazolam (Halcion)
zaleplon (Sonata)
zolpidem (Ambien)
melatonin
ramelteon (Rozerem)

The reason these concepts are important to the
prescriber is not so much the precision of the estimates
of thresholds, as these may vary from patient to
patient. Instead, these concepts inform the prescriber
about what to do to get the Goldilocks solution for
individual patients. If the patient is not falling asleep
quickly enough, theoretically the patient does not reach
threshold fast enough, so either give the drug earlier in

the evening, or don’t take with food (food can delay the
absorption of some agents), or raise the dose, or change
the mechanism. If the patient is not sleeping long enough
(Figure 10-41D), theoretically threshold levels are lost too
early, so either raise the dose or switch to a drug with a
longer duration of action above the threshold (generally,
this would be drugs with a longer pharmacokinetic
half-life; see Figures 10-41A and 10-41C). If the patient
429


