<<<PAGE 310>>>

STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

metabolite after discontinuing fluoxetine, and prior
to starting other agents such as a monoamine oxidase
(MAO) inhibitor. Fluoxetine is not only available as a
once-daily formulation, but also as a once-weekly oral
dosage formulation.
Sertraline: An SSRI with Dopamine Transporter (DAT)
Inhibition and σ1 Binding

This SSRI has two candidate mechanisms that
distinguish it: dopamine transporter (DAT) inhibition
and σ1 receptor binding (Figure 7-17). The DAT
inhibitory actions are controversial since they are
weaker than the SERT inhibitory actions, thus leading
some experts to suggest that there is not sufficient
DAT occupancy by sertraline to be clinically relevant.
However, as will be discussed later in the section on
norepinephrine–dopamine reuptake inhibitors (NDRIs),
it is not clear that high degrees of DAT occupancy
are necessary or even desirable in order to contribute
to antidepressant actions. That is, perhaps only a
small amount of DAT inhibition is sufficient to cause
improvement in energy, motivation, and concentration,
especially when added to another action such as SERT
inhibition. In fact, high-impact DAT inhibition is the
property of reinforcing stimulants, including cocaine
and methamphetamine, and would not generally be
desired in a drug for depression (see discussion of DAT
inhibitors in Chapter 11 on ADHD and Chapter 13 on
impulsivity, compulsivity, and addiction).

sertraline

Anecdotally, clinicians have observed the mild and
desirable activating actions of sertraline in some patients
with “atypical depression,” improving symptoms of
hypersomnia, low energy, and mood reactivity. A favorite
combination of some clinicians for depressed patients is
to add bupropion to sertraline (i.e., Wellbutrin to Zoloft,
sometimes called “Well-oft”), adding together the weak
DAT inhibitory properties of each agent. Clinicians have
also observed the overactivation of some patients with
panic disorder by sertraline, thus requiring slower dose
titration in some patients with anxiety symptoms. All of
these actions of sertraline are consistent with weak DAT
inhibitory actions contributing to its clinical portfolio of
actions.
The σ1 actions of sertraline are not well understood,
but might contribute to its anxiolytic effects and
especially to its effects in psychotic and delusional
depression, where sertraline may have advantageous
therapeutic effects compared to some other SSRIs.
Paroxetine: An SSRI with Muscarinic Anticholinergic and
Norepinephrine Transporter (NET) Inhibitory Actions

This SSRI tends to be more calming, even sedating, early
in treatment compared to the more activating actions of
both fluoxetine and sertraline discussed above. Perhaps
the mild anticholinergic actions of paroxetine contribute
to this clinical profile (Figure 7-18). Paroxetine also
has weak norepinephrine transporter (NET) inhibitory
properties, which could contribute to its efficacy in
depression, especially at high doses. The advantages of

paroxetine
DAT

M1

NET

SERT
SERT

SERT
SERT

NOS

Figure 7-17 Sertraline. Sertraline has dopamine transporter
(DAT) inhibition and σ1 receptor binding in addition to serotonin
reuptake inhibition (SRI). The clinical relevance of sertraline’s
DAT inhibition is unknown, although it may improve energy,
motivation, and concentration. Its sigma properties may
contribute to anxiolytic actions and may also be helpful in
patients with psychotic depression.

294

Figure 7-18 Paroxetine. In addition to serotonin reuptake
inhibition, paroxetine has mild anticholinergic actions
(M1), which can be calming or possibly sedating; weak
norepinephrine transporter (NET) inhibition, which may
contribute to further antidepressant actions; and inhibition of
the enzyme nitric oxide synthase (NOS), which may contribute to
sexual dysfunction.




<<<PAGE 319>>>

Chapter 7: Treatments for Mood Disorders

symptoms of unipolar depression. Painful physical
symptoms are frequently ignored or missed by patients
and clinicians alike in the setting of unipolar major
depression, and until recently, the link of these symptoms
to major depression was not well appreciated, in part
because painful physical symptoms are not included
in the list of symptoms for the formal diagnostic
criteria for depression (see Chapter 6 and Figure 6-1).
Nevertheless, it is now widely appreciated that painful
physical symptoms are frequently associated with a
major depressive episode, and are also one of the leading
residual symptoms after initial treatment with drugs for
depression (Figure 7-5). It appears that the dual SNRI
actions of duloxetine and other SNRIs are superior to
the selective serotonergic actions of SSRIs for treatment
of conditions such as neuropathic pain of diabetes and
chronic painful physical symptoms associated with
depression. The role of NET inhibition seems to be
critical for the treatment not only of painful conditions
without depression, but also for painful physical
symptoms associated with depression. Duloxetine
has also shown efficacy in the treatment of cognitive
symptoms of depression that are prominent in geriatric
depression, possibly exploiting the pro-noradrenergic and
pro-dopaminergic consequences of NET inhibition in the
prefrontal cortex (see Figure 7-33).
Duloxetine can be given once a day, but this is usually
only a good idea after the patient has had a chance to
become tolerant to it after initiating it at twice-daily
dosing, especially during titration to higher doses.
Duloxetine may have a lower incidence of hypertension
and milder withdrawal reactions than venlafaxine.
Milnacipran

Milnacipran is the first SNRI marketed in Japan and many
European countries such as France, where it is currently
marketed as a drug for unipolar depression. In the US,
milnacipran is not approved for unipolar depression,
but is approved for fibromyalgia. Interestingly, it is the
other way around in Europe: milnacipran is approved for
unipolar depression but not approved for the treatment
of fibromyalgia. Milnacipran is a bit different from other
SNRIs in that it is a relatively more potent NET than
SERT inhibitor (Figure 7-30), whereas the others are
more potent SERT than NET inhibitors (Figures 7-28
and 7-29). This unique pharmacological profile may
explain milnacipran’s somewhat different clinical profile
compared to other SNRIs. Since noradrenergic actions
may be equally or more important for treatment of painrelated conditions compared to serotonergic actions, the

robust NET inhibition of milnacipran suggests that it may
be particularly useful in chronic pain related conditions,
not just fibromyalgia where it is approved, but possibly
as well for the painful physical symptoms associated with
unipolar depression and chronic neuropathic pain.
Milnacipran’s potent NET inhibition also suggests
a potentially favorable pharmacological profile for the
treatment of cognitive symptoms, including cognitive
symptoms of unipolar depression as well as cognitive
symptoms frequently associated with fibromyalgia,
sometimes called “fibro-fog.” Other clinical observations
possibly linked to milnacipran’s robust NET inhibition
are that it can be more energizing and activating than
other SNRIs. Common residual symptoms after treatment
with an SSRI include not only cognitive symptoms, but
also fatigue, lack of energy, and lack of interest, among
other symptoms (Figure 7-5). NET inhibition may be
related to observations that milnacipran may cause
more sweating and urinary hesitancy than some other
SNRIs. For patients with urinary hesitancy, generally
due theoretically to robust pro-noradrenergic actions at
bladder α1 receptors, an α1 antagonist can reduce these
symptoms. Milnacipran must generally be given twice
daily due to its shorter half-life.
Levomilnacipran

Milnacipran is actually a racemic mixture of two
enantiomers (Figure 7-30). The S or levo enantiomer
is the active enantiomer (Figure 7-31) and has been
independently developed for unipolar major depressive
disorder in the US, where it is mostly available. Like
racemic milnacipran, levomilnacipran has greater NET
inhibition than SERT inhibition and may target fatigue
and lack of energy as potential clinical advantages. Also,
it is dosed in a controlled-release formulation, so, unlike
racemic milnacipran, can be given only once a day.
Norepinephrine–Dopamine Reuptake Inhibitors
(NDRIs): Bupropion

For many years, the mechanism of action of bupropion
has been unclear and still remains somewhat
controversial. Bupropion itself only has weak reuptake
blocking properties for dopamine (DAT inhibition),
and for norepinephrine (NET inhibition) (Figures 7-34
and 7-35). No other specific or potent pharmacological
actions have been consistently identified for this
agent. Bupropion’s actions both as a drug for unipolar
depression and upon norepinephrine and dopamine
neurotransmission, however, have always appeared to be
more powerful than these weak properties could explain,
303

7




<<<PAGE 320>>>

STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

NDRI
DAT

NET

Figure 7-34 Norepinephrine–dopamine reuptake inhibitor
(NDRI). The prototypical norepinephrine–dopamine reuptake
inhibitor (NDRI) is bupropion. Bupropion has weak blocking
properties for the dopamine transporter (DAT) and for the
norepinephrine transporter (NET). Its antidepressant actions may
be explained in part by the more potent inhibitory properties of
its metabolites.

leading to proposals that bupropion acts rather vaguely as
an adrenergic modulator of some type.
Bupropion is metabolized to a number of active
metabolites, some of which are not only more potent
NET inhibitors than bupropion itself and equally potent
DAT inhibitors, but are also concentrated in the brain. In
some ways, therefore, bupropion is both an active drug
and a precursor for other active drugs (i.e., a prodrug
for multiple active metabolites). The most potent of
these is the + enantiomer of the 6-hydroxy metabolite of
bupropion, also known as radafaxine.
Can the net effects of bupropion on NETs (Figure 7-36A
and 7-36B) and DATs (Figure 7-36C) account for its clinical
actions in depressed patients at therapeutic doses? If one
believes that 90% transporter occupancy of DATs and
NETs are required for drugs for antidepressant actions,
the answer would be “no.” Human positron emission
tomography (PET) scans suggest that as little as 10–15%
and perhaps no more than 20–30% of striatal DATs may
be occupied at therapeutic doses of bupropion. NET
occupancy would be expected to be in this same range. Is
this enough to explain bupropion’s antidepressant actions?

NDRI Action

Figure 7-35 NDRI actions. The norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor portion of the NDRI molecule (left panel) and the dopamine reuptake
inhibitor portion of the NDRI molecule (right panel) are inserted into their respective reuptake pumps. Consequently, both pumps are
blocked, and synaptic norepinephrine and dopamine are increased.

304




<<<PAGE 322>>>

STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Agomelatine

Agomelatine (Figure 7-37) is approved to treat unipolar
depression in many countries outside of the US. It has
agonist actions at melatonin 1 (MT1) and melatonin
2 (MT2) receptors and antagonist actions at 5HT2C
receptors (Figure 7-37). As discussed above in the section

agomelatine

B

T2

306

symptoms of reduced positive affect following treatment
with an SSRI or an SNRI, or who develop these symptoms
as a side effect of an SSRI or SNRI, frequently benefit from
switching to bupropion or from augmenting their SSRI
or SNRI treatment with bupropion. The combination
of bupropion with an SSRI or an SNRI has a theoretical
rationale as a strategy for covering the entire symptom
portfolio from symptoms of reduced positive affect to
symptoms of increased negative affect (Figure 6-41).
Bupropion combined with the μ-opioid antagonist
naltrexone is approved for the treatment of obesity and
mentioned in Chapter 13 on impulsivity/compulsivity
syndromes. Bupropion combined with the NMDA (Nmethyl-D-aspartate) antagonist dextromethorphan is in
late-stage clinical trials both for depression (mentioned
below) and for agitation in Alzheimer disease (discussed
in Chapter 12 on dementia).

5H

controlled-release formulations, DAT inhibitors are less
abusable and more useful for ADHD (see Chapter 11).
The issue to be considered here is whether a low level
of slow-onset and long-lasting DAT occupancy is the
desirable solution for the DAT mechanism to be useful
as a drug for unipolar depression: thus, not too much or
too fast DAT inhibition and therefore abusable; not too
little DAT inhibition and therefore ineffective; but just
enough DAT inhibition with slow enough onset and long
enough duration of action to make it an effective drug for
unipolar depression.
The fact that bupropion is not known to be
particularly abusable, is not a scheduled substance, yet
is proven effective for treating nicotine addiction, is
consistent with the possibility that it is occupying DATs
in the striatum and nucleus accumbens in a manner
sufficient to mitigate craving but not sufficient to
cause abuse (Figure 7-36C). This use of bupropion for
smoking cessation is discussed further in Chapter 13 on
drug abuse and reward. Perhaps this low level of DAT
occupancy (Figure 7-36C) is also how bupropion works in
unipolar depression, combined with an equally low action
on NETs (Figure 7-36A and 7-36B).
Bupropion was originally marketed only in the
US as an immediate-release dosage formulation for
three-times-daily administration as a drug for unipolar
depression. Development of a twice-daily formulation
(bupropion SR) and then a once-daily formulation
(bupropion XL) have not only reduced the frequency
of seizures at peak plasma drug levels, but have also
increased convenience and enhanced compliance as well.
Thus, the use of immediate-release bupropion is all but
abandoned in favor of once-daily administration.
Bupropion is generally activating or even stimulating.
Bupropion does not appear to cause the bothersome sexual
dysfunction that frequently occurs with many drugs for
unipolar depression that act by SERT inhibition, probably
because bupropion lacks a significant serotonergic
component to its mechanism of action. Thus, bupropion
has proven to be a useful drug for unipolar depression not
only for patients who cannot tolerate the serotonergic side
effects of SSRIs, but also for patients whose depression
does not respond to serotonergic boosting by SSRIs.
Consistent with its pharmacological profile, bupropion
is especially targeted at the symptoms of the “dopamine
deficiency syndrome” and “reduced positive affect” (see
Figure 6-41), including improvement in the symptoms
of loss of happiness, joy, interest, pleasure, energy,
enthusiasm, alertness, and self-confidence. Almost every
active clinician knows that patients who have residual

5H

T2

C

MT1

MT2

Figure 7-37 Agomelatine. Endogenous melatonin is secreted
by the pineal gland and mainly acts in the suprachiasmatic
nucleus to regulate circadian rhythms. There are three types
of receptors for melatonin: 1 and 2 (MT1 and MT2), which are
both involved in sleep, and 3, which is actually the enzyme
NRH–quinine oxidoreductase 2 and not thought to be involved
in sleep physiology. Agomelatine is not only a melatonin 1
and 2 receptor agonist, but is also a 5HT2C and 5HT2B receptor
antagonist, and is available to treat depression in countries
outside of the US.




<<<PAGE 370>>>

STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

combines dextromethorphan with the CYP450 2D6
inhibitor quinidine (Figure 7-84). The latter combination
has already been approved to treat pathological laughing
and crying in pseudobulbar affect. A newer version of the
latter combination has deuterated the dextromethorphan
molecule and altered the dose of quinidine (Figure 7-85).
Deuteration extends the half-life of a compound and allows
re-patenting for commercial development (deuteration of
tetrabenazine was previously discussed in Chapter 5 in the
section on treatment of tardive dyskinesia and illustrated in
Figure 5-11B). Although it is clear that dextromethorphan
has clinically relevant affinity for the NMDA receptor,
other binding properties are less well characterized,
including σ1 receptor binding, SERT inhibition, and weak
μ-opioid binding (Figure 7-84). As for all NMDA receptor
antagonists studied for treatment-resistant depression, it is
unclear which subtypes of NMDA receptor are engaged by
dextromethorphan, which are most important, and what
the role of σ1 or μ-opioid binding is in rapid antidepressant
action.
Dextromethorphan is rapidly metabolized by
CYP450 2D6 making it difficult to achieve therapeutic
blood levels following oral administration without

concomitant administration of a CYP450 2D6 inhibitor.
Each combination product adds a 2D6 inhibitor
(Figure 7-84). Quinidine is a 2D6 inhibitor at doses
below its cardiovascular actions, and bupropion is
not only an NDRI (Figures 7-34 and 7-35) but also
a 2D6 inhibitor. For bupropion, as discussed above
and illustrated in Figures 7-34 and 7-35, in addition
to 2D6 inhibition there is the monoamine-associated
antidepressant mechanism of NRDIs (Figure 7-84)
with the potential for synergy with the NMDA
antagonist mechanism of dextromethorphan. Both
combination products are in trials for treatmentresistant depression with some promising initial results,
especially for dextromethorphan–bupropion, which
has been awarded breakthrough therapy status by the
US FDA for major depressive disorder and fast-track
designation for treatment-resistant depression. Both
combination products are also in trials for agitation
in Alzheimer disease and show some promising initial
results, especially for dextromethorphan–bupropion,
wh ich was given fast-track designation by the FDA.
Dextromethorphan–bupropion treatment of agitation in
dementia is discussed further in Chapter 12 on dementia.

dextromethorphan
(DXM)

Figure 7-84 Dextromethorphan–
bupropion and dextromethorphan–
quinidine. Dextromethorphan is a
weak N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA)
receptor antagonist, with stronger
binding affinity for the serotonin
transporter (SERT) and σ1 receptors. It
is rapidly metabolized by CYP450 2D6,
making it difficult to achieve therapeutic
blood levels without concomitant
administration of a CYP450 2D6
inhibitor. Dextromethorphan is being
studied in combination with the
norepinephrine–dopamine reuptake
inhibitor (NDRI) bupropion, which
also inhibits CYP450 2D6, and in
combination with the CYP450 2D6
inhibitor quinidine.

NMDA
α1D
σ1

SERT

SERT

++

+

σ1 NMDA α1D

+

+

+

+

quinidine

bupropion

DAT
2D6

2D6
NET

NDRI

354

quinidine




<<<PAGE 496>>>

STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Noradrenergic Treatment of ADHD
Atomoxetine

Atomoxetine (Figure 11-37) is a selective norepinephrine
reuptake inhibitor (NRI). Sometimes called NET
inhibitors, the selective NRIs have known antidepressant
properties (discussed in Chapter 7). In terms of their
mechanism of therapeutic action in ADHD, it is the same
as just discussed for stimulants acting at the NETs here
in Chapter 11, and as previously discussed for drugs used
to treat depression in Chapter 7 and illustrated in Figure
7-33. Blocking NETs in the prefrontal cortex increases

Comparing the Molecular Actions of
Atomoxetine and Bupropion
DAT

NDRIs
NET

NE
neuron

DA
neuron

NRIs
NET

Figure 11-37 Comparing the molecular actions of atomoxetine
and bupropion. Atomoxetine is a selective norepinephrine
reuptake inhibitor (NRI), while bupropion is a norepinephrine–
dopamine reuptake inhibitor (NDRI). Both agents block the
norepinephrine transporters (NETs) in the prefrontal cortex,
which leads to an increase in both norepinephrine (NE) and
dopamine (DA) there (because NETs also transport dopamine).
NDRIs also block the dopamine transporters (DATs), which
are not present in the prefrontal cortex but are present in the
nucleus accumbens.

480

both DA and NE in the prefrontal cortex (Figure 11-38)
and is why NET inhibitors are thought to work in ADHD.
However, since there are few NE neurons and NETs in
nucleus accumbens, inhibiting NET does not lead to an
increase in either NE or DA there (Figure 11-38) and is
why NET inhibitors are thought not to have reinforcing,
abuse, or addiction potential.
Bupropion is a weak NRI and also a weak DAT
inhibitor known as a norepinephrine–dopamine reuptake
inhibitor (NDRI), and was previously discussed as a
treatment for depression in Chapter 7 and illustrated
in Figures 7-34 through 7-36; see also Figure 11-37).
Several tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs) have notable
NRI actions, such as desipramine and nortriptyline. All of
these agents with NRI properties have been utilized in the
treatment of ADHD, with varying amounts of success, but
only atomoxetine is well-investigated and approved for
this use in children and adults.
Atomoxetine’s hypothetical actions in ADHD patients
with stress and comorbidity states, presumably linked
to excessive and phasic DA and NE release, are shown
conceptually by comparing the untreated states in Figures
11-11 and 11-12 with the changes that theoretically follow
chronic treatment with atomoxetine in Figure 11-39. That
is, ADHD linked to conditions that are associated with
chronic stress and comorbidities is theoretically caused
by overly active NE and DA circuits in the prefrontal
cortex, resulting in an excess of phasic NE and DA
activity (Figure 11-13). When slow onset, long duration,
and essentially perpetual NET inhibition occurs in the
prefrontal cortex due to atomoxetine, this theoretically
restores tonic postsynaptic D1 and α2A-adrenergic
signaling, downregulates phasic NE and DA actions, and
desensitizes postsynaptic NE and DA receptors (Figure
11-39). The possible consequence of this is to reduce
stress as ADHD symptoms are improved. If so, decreases
in ADHD symptoms could potentially be accompanied
by decreases in anxiety, depression, and heavy drinking.
Unlike stimulant use, where the therapeutic actions are
at the mercy of plasma drug levels and momentary NET/
DAT occupancies, actions from long-term NRI actions
give 24-hour symptom relief, in much the same manner
as do SSRIs (selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors) and
SNRIs (serotonin–norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors)
for the treatment of depression and anxiety. Selective
NRIs generally have smaller effect sizes for reducing
ADHD symptoms than stimulants in short-term trials,
especially in patients without comorbidity. However,
NRIs are not necessarily inferior in ADHD patients who




<<<PAGE 520>>>

STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Circuits of Treatable Symptoms in Dementia
memory network

psychosis network

agitation network

dextromethorphan+
bupropion
pimavanserin

AChE

cortex

cortex

cortex

brexpiprazole

memantine

memory output
A

agitation output

psychosis output
B

C

Acetylcholinesterase inhibitors
and NMDA antagonist
memantine for
memory

5HT2A antagonist
pimavanserin for
psychosis

plaque

tangle

NMDA antagonist DXM
and multifunctional
1, 2, D2, 5HT1A, 5HT2A
brexpiprazole for
agitation

stroke

Figure 12-23 Circuits of treatable symptoms in dementia. Treatment of dementia is currently symptomatic rather than disease-modifying.
There are three main treatable symptoms in dementia: memory problems, psychosis, and agitation. Treatment strategies for each of these
symptoms arise from the notion that each symptom is hypothetically regulated by a unique network or circuit of neurons. Each network
connects specific glutamate, GABA (γ-aminobutyric acid), serotonin, and dopamine neurons at nodes (synapses) between these different
neurons that can influence not only the neuron being directly innervated but the entire network, via downstream effects set in motion at the
node. (A) Acetylcholine and glutamate can be targeted by acetylcholinesterase (AChE) inhibitors and the NMDA (N-methyl-D-aspartate)
antagonist memantine, respectively, to improve cognition in the memory network. (B) Psychosis can be targeted at the serotonin node
as well as the dopamine node of the psychosis network. In particular, the 5HT2A antagonist pimavanserin is approved to treat psychosis
in Parkinson’s disease. (C) Multimodal neurotransmitters (norepinephrine, serotonin, dopamine, and glutamate) can be targeted in the
agitation network to improve the symptom of agitation in dementia. The NMDA antagonist dextromethorphan (DXM) in combination with
bupropion and the multimodal agent brexpiprazole are both being studied for their use in agitation associated with dementia.

different neurons that can influence not only the neuron
being directly innervated but the entire network, via
downstream effects set in motion at the node. Nodes are
the sites of potential therapeutic action by targeting them
with drugs acting on the neurotransmitters normally
working at that node. Thus, acetylcholine and glutamate
504

can be targeted at different nodes to improve cognition
in the memory network (Figure 12-23A). Similarly,
we now know that psychosis can be therapeutically
targeted at the serotonin node as well as the dopamine
node of the psychosis network, since both are mutually




<<<PAGE 549>>>

Chapter 12: Dementia: Causes, Symptomatic Treatments, and the Neurotransmitter Network Acetylcholine

activation by norepinephrine from locus coeruleus
output at α2c and α1 postsynaptic receptors on dendrites
of pyramidal neurons should reduce arousal and
emotional responses (Figure 12-47); blocking normal
serotonin excitation by antagonist actions at 5HT2A
receptors and enhancing normal serotonin inhibition
by partial agonist actions at 5HT1A receptors should also
combine to reduce limbic drives to motor and emotional
outputs of agitation (Figure 12-47). Brexpiprazole is
approved for use in schizophrenia and depression, and is
in late-stage clinical testing for agitation in AD.
Targeting Glutamate for the Symptomatic Treatment
of Agitation in Alzheimer Disease

Excessive glutamate output in memory circuits has
already been discussed (Figures 12-37A, 12-37B, and 1237C; see also Figure 4-52D and discussion in Chapter 4).
Although the NMDA glutamate antagonist memantine
has proven effective in symptomatic treatment of
cognition/memory in AD, it has not been systematically
tested in agitation of AD. Furthermore, the widespread
use of memantine does not suggest any anecdotal
evidence for efficacy in agitation, perhaps because it is
a relatively weak blocker of NMDA receptors, with low
potency.

More robust blockade of NMDA receptors is
attained by dextromethorphan, discussed in Chapter
7 on drugs for depression and illustrated in Figure
7-84. As mentioned in Chapter 7 there are multiple
forms of dextromethorphan in testing, including
a deuterated derivative as well as combinations of
dextromethorphan with one or another of two different
CYP450 2D6 inhibitors, either bupropion or quinidine.
The formulation of dextromethorphan with the CYP450
2D6 inhibitor and norepinephrine–dopamine reuptake
inhibitor (NDRI) bupropion (also known as AXS-05;
Figure 7-84) has promising results in major depressive
disorder and treatment-resistant depression (discussed
in Chapter 7 on treatment of mood disorders) and in
agitation of AD (mentioned here and illustrated in
Figure 12-48). Although there are several potential
therapeutic mechanisms of dextromethorphan
combinations, it is likely that NMDA antagonist
action is how this drug works to quell agitation in AD.
Hypothetically dextromethorphan–bupropion blocks
the excessive excitatory glutamate output from the
agitation network that leads to motor (Figure 12-45B)
and emotional agitation (Figure 12-46B) by blocking
NMDA receptors in cortex, thalamus, amygdala, ventral
tegmental area, and locus coeruleus (Figure 12-48).

NMDA Antagonism Reduces Agitation in Alzheimer Disease

top-down inhibition

agitation

Figure 12-48 NMDA antagonist
treatment for agitation. The NMDA
antagonist dextromethorphan (DXM), in
combination with the norepinephrine–
dopamine reuptake inhibitor
(NDRI) bupropion, is in testing as a
treatment for agitation. Hypothetically,
dextromethorphan–bupropion blocks
the excessive excitatory glutamate
output from the agitation network
that leads to motor and emotional
agitation by blocking NMDA receptors
in the cortex, thalamus, amygdala,
ventral tegmental area (VTA), and locus
coeruleus (LC).

cortex

12

LC

VTA
striatum

amygdala

DXM

=

NMDA antagonism
NDRI

thalamus

sensory and
emotional
input

533




<<<PAGE 553>>>

Chapter 12: Dementia: Causes, Symptomatic Treatments, and the Neurotransmitter Network Acetylcholine

These various descriptions all integrate the notion
of lack of spontaneous behaviors and emotions with
diminished reactivity to the environment, often the
opposite to what is observed in agitation (see Table 12-8).
The clinical presentation of apathy often differs
among various types of dementias; for instance, affective
apathy is more common in the behavioral variant of FTD
compared to AD. Both dopaminergic and cholinergic
neurotransmitter systems seem to be involved in the
various types of apathy; potential treatments, therefore,
include dopamine agonists such as bupropion, levodopa,
and stimulants, as well as cholinesterase inhibitors, but
none is approved for this use and none is particularly
robust in efficacy.
A primary reason why drugs used for depression
do not work well in apathy of dementia is that apathy
is not depression. That is, guilt, worthlessness, and
hopelessness, the symptom hallmarks of depression
(see Chapter 6 and Figure 6-1), are typically not
present in patients with apathy in dementia. When
use of medications for apathy in dementia is needed,
cholinesterase inhibitors may be effective in some
patients and are a first-line consideration in AD, but
might work better for prevention of these symptoms than
for their treatment once they have emerged. Also, FTD
patients may be more likely to benefit from SSRIs (e.g.,
citalopram or escitalopram) or SNRIs.
Other Treatments for the Behavioral Symptoms of
Dementia

As mentioned earlier and shown in Table 12-9,
there are several non-pharmacological options for
treating neuropsychiatric symptoms in patients with
dementia, and given the risks associated with many
pharmacological treatments, the lack of approval of
many agents, and their relative lack of efficacy, nonpharmacological interventions should always be
considered first-line. This will also be the case even
if pimavanserin is approved for psychosis in all-cause
dementia and if brexpiprazole and dextromethorphan–
bupropion are approved for agitation in AD.
It is particularly important to keep in mind that
physical pain, infection, or local irritation can be

the underlying cause for many secondary behavioral
symptoms in patients with dementia. Just as with
household pets or small children, a patient with dementia
may not be able to express or describe the physical pain
they are experiencing; thus it is up to astute clinicians and
caregivers to identify and treat causes of pain that may be
leading to neuropsychiatric symptoms, such as agitation
and depression, in patients with dementia. If pain is
contributing to behavioral symptoms, psychotropic
medications may have little effect whereas alleviating the
source of the pain may be quite effective. For instance,
treatment with simple acetaminophen (paracetamol)
can sometimes ameliorate agitation. Similarly, other
modifiable sources of behavioral symptoms (e.g.,
boredom, excess stimulation, etc.) should be recognized
and addressed.

SUMMARY
The most common dementia is Alzheimer disease (AD),
and the leading theory for its etiology is the amyloid
cascade hypothesis. Other dementias including vascular
dementia, dementia with Lewy bodies, Parkinson’s
disease dementia, and frontotemporal dementia are
also discussed as well, as are their differing pathologies,
clinical presentations, and neuroimaging findings.
New diagnostic criteria define three stages of AD:
asymptomatic, mild cognitive impairment, and
dementia. Major research efforts have recently pivoted
away from attempting to find disease-modifying
treatments that could halt or even reverse the course
of this illness by interfering with Aβ accumulation in
the brain because many such treatments have failed
over the past 30 years. Leading treatments for AD
today include symptomatic treatment of memory and
cognition with the cholinesterase inhibitors, based upon
the cholinergic hypothesis of amnesia, and memantine,
an NMDA antagonist, based upon the glutamate
hypothesis of cognitive decline. Novel treatments
on the threshold of approval include the 5HT2A
antagonist pimavanserin for symptomatic treatment
of dementia-related psychosis, and both brexpiprazole
and dextromethorphan–bupropion for symptomatic
treatment of agitation in AD.

537

12




<<<PAGE 569>>>

Chapter 13: Impulsivity, Compulsivity, and Addiction

receptors on the VTA dopamine neuron (shown in
Figure 13-13A). During smoking cessation, resensitized
nicotinic receptors no longer receiving nicotine are
craving due to an absence of dopamine release in the
nucleus accumbens (where is my dopamine?) (Figure
13-13B). When the NDRI bupropion is administered,
theoretically a bit of dopamine is now released in the
nucleus accumbens, making the craving less but usually
not eliminating it (Figure 13-13C). How effective is
bupropion in smoking cessation? Quit rates for bupropion
are about half that of the NPA varenicline. Quit rates for
nicotine in alternative routes of administration such as
transdermal patches are similar to those of bupropion.
Novel approaches to treating nicotine addiction include
the investigation of nicotine vaccines and other directacting nicotinic cholinergic agents.

Alcohol

The famous artist Vincent van Gogh reportedly drank
ruinously, some speculating that he self-medicated his
bipolar disorder this way, a notion reinforced by his
explanation, “If the storm within gets too loud, I take
a glass too much to stun myself.” Alcohol may stun
but it does not treat psychiatric disorders adaptively
long term. Unfortunately, many alcoholics who have
comorbid psychiatric disorders continue to selfmedicate with alcohol rather than seeking treatment
with a more appropriate psychopharmacological agent.
In addition to frequent comorbidity with psychiatric
disorders, it is estimated that 85% of alcoholics also
smoke. Many alcoholics abuse additional drugs as well,
including benzodiazepines, marijuana, opioids, and
others.

Mechanism of Action of Bupropion in Smoking Cessation
ACh
neuron

ACh
DA
neuron

DA

nicotine

A

ACh
neuron

Figure 13-13 Mechanism of action of
bupropion in smoking cessation. (A)
A regular smoker delivers reliable
nicotine (circle), releasing dopamine
(DA) in the limbic area at frequent
intervals, which is rewarding to the
limbic dopamine D2 receptors on the
right. (B) However, during attempts
at smoking cessation, dopamine will
be cut off when nicotine no longer
releases it from the mesolimbic
neurons. This upsets the postsynaptic
D2 limbic receptors and leads to
craving and what some call a “nicotine
fit.” (C) A therapeutic approach to
diminishing craving during the early
stages of smoking cessation is to
deliver a bit of dopamine itself by
blocking dopamine reuptake directly
at the nerve terminal with bupropion.
Although not as powerful as nicotine,
it does take the edge off and can make
abstinence more tolerable.

where's my
dopamine??

DA
neuron

B

ACh
neuron

DA
neuron

NDRI

13
C

553




<<<PAGE 626>>>

Suggested Reading and Selected References

Roozen HG, de Waart R, van der Windt DAW, et al. (2005) A
systematic review of the effectiveness of naltrexone in the
maintenance treatment of opioid and alcohol dependence.
Eur Neuropsychopharmacol 16: 311–23.
Smith-Bernardin S, Rowe C, Behar E, et al. (2018) Low
threshold extended release naltrexone for high utilizers
of public services with severe alcohol use disorder: a pilot
study. J Subst Abuse Treat 85: 109–15.
Soyka M (2014) Nalmefene for the treatment of alcohol
dependence: a current update. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol
17: 675–84.
Van Amsterdam J, van den Brink W (2013) Reduced risk
drinking as a viable treatment goal in problematic alcohol
use and alcohol dependence. J Psychopharmacol 27:
987–97.
Wiers CE, Stelzel C, Gladwin TE, et al. (2015) Effects of
cognitive bias modification training on neural alcohol cue
reactivity in alcohol dependence. Am J Psychiatry 172:
334–43.

Substance Abuse: Cannabis
Black N, Stockings E, Campbell G, et al. (2019) Cannabinoids
for the treatment of mental disorders and symptoms of
mental disorders: a systematic review and meta analysis.
Lancet Psychiatry 6: 995–1010.
Haney M, Hill MN (2018) Cannabis and cannabinoids:
from synapse to society. Neuropsychopharm Rev 43:
1–212.
Hindley G, Beck K, Borgan B (2020) Psychiatric symptoms
caused by cannabis constituents: a systematic review and
meta-analysis. Lancet Psychiatry 7: 344–53.
Hines LA, Freeman TP, Gage SH, et al. (2020) Association of
high potency cannabis use with mental and substance use
in adolescence. JAMA Psychiatry 77: 1044–51.
Hurd YL, Spriggs S, Alishayev J, et al. (2019) Cannabidiol for
the reduction of cue-induced craving and anxiety in drug
abstinent individuals with heroin use disorder: a double
blind randomized placebo controlled trial. Am J Psychiatry
176: 911–22.
James S (2020) A Clinician’s Guide to Cannabinoid Science.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kovacs FE, Knop T, Urbanski MJ, et al. (2012) Exogenous
and endogenous cannabinoids suppress inhibitory
neurotransmission in the human neocortex.
Neuropsychopharmacology 37: 1104–14.
Mason BJ, Crean R, Goodell V, et al. (2012) A proof-of-concept
randomized controlled study of gabapentin: effects on
cannabis use, withdrawal and executive function deficits
in cannabis-dependent adults. Neuropsychopharmacology
37: 1689–98.

610

Nugent SM, Morasco BJ, O’Neil ME, et al. (2017) The effects of
cannabis among adults with chronic pain and an overview
of general harms: a systematic review. Ann Intern Med 167:
319–31.

Substance Abuse: Nicotine
Akkus F, Ametamey SM, Treyer V, et al. (2013) Market global
reduction in mGlutR5 receptor binding in smokers and
ex smokers determined by 11C-ABP688 positron emission
tomography. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 10: 737–42.
Akkus F, Treyer V, Johayem A, et al. (2016) Association of
long-term nicotine abstinence with normal metabotropic
glutamate receptor 5 binding. Biol Psychiatry 79: 474–80.
Crunelle CL, Miller ML, Booij J, van den Rink W (2010) The
nicotinic acetylcholine receptor partial agonist varenicline
and the treatment of drug dependence: a review. Eur
Neuropsychopharmacol 20: 69–79.
Culbertson CS, Bramen J, Cohen MS (2011) Effect of bupropion
treatment on brain activation induced by cigarette-related
cues in smokers. Arch Gen Psychiatry 68: 505–15.
Evins AE, Culhane MA, Alpert JE, et al. (2008) A controlled
trial of bupropion added to nicotine patch and behavioral
therapy for smoking cessation in adults with unipolar
depressive disorders. J Clin Psychopharmacol 28: 660–6.
Franklin T, Wang Z, Suh JJ, et al. (2011) Effects of varenicline
on smoking cue-triggered neural and craving responses.
Arch Gen Psychiatry 68: 516–26.
King DP, Paciga S, Pickering E, et al. (2012) Smoking
cessation pharmacogenetics: analysis of varenicline
and bupropion in placebo-controlled clinical trials.
Neuropsychopharmacology 37: 641–50.
Lotipour S, Mandelkern M, Alvarez-Estrada M, Brody AL
(2012) A single administration of low-dose varenicline
saturates α4β2* nicotinic acetylcholine receptors in the
human brain. Neuropsychopharmacology 37: 1738–48.
Steinberg MB, Greenhaus S, Schmelzer AC, et al. (2009)
Triple-combination pharmacotherapy for medically ill
smokers. A randomized trial. Ann Intern Med 150: 447–54.

Substance Abuse: Opioids
Bell J, Strang J (2020) Medication treatment of opioid use
disorder. Biol Psychiatry 87: 82–8.
Chutuape MA, Jasinski DR, Finerhood MI, Stitzer ML (2001)
One-, three-, and six-month outcomes after brief inpatient
opioid detoxification. Am J Drug Alcohol Abuse 27: 19–44.
Davids E, Gastpar M (2004) Buprenorphine in the treatment of
opioid dependence. Eur Neuropsychopharmacol 14: 209–16.
Elkader A, Sproule B (2005) Buprenorphine: clinical
pharmacokinetics in the treatment of opioid dependence.
Clin Pharmacokinet 44: 661–80.


