<<<PAGE 457>>>

Chapter 10: Disorders of Sleep and Wakefulness and Their Treatment

Mechanism of Action of Caffeine:
DA Actions at D2 Receptors

Adenosine and Endogenous
Purines Reduce DA Binding

Figure 10-59 Caffeine. Caffeine is
an antagonist at purine receptors,
and in particular adenosine receptors.
(A) These receptors are functionally
coupled with certain postsynaptic
dopamine (DA) receptors, such
as dopamine D2 receptors, at
which dopamine binds and has a
stimulatory effect. (B) When adenosine
binds to its receptors, this causes
reduced sensitivity of D2 receptors. (C)
Antagonism of adenosine receptors
by caffeine prevents adenosine from
binding there, and thus can enhance
dopaminergic actions.

adenosine

purine
receptor

D2
receptor

+

B

A

Caffeine Antagonizes Adenosine Binding
and Enhances DA Actions

caffeine

C

+
+

10

+

in the presence of adenosine (Figure 10-59C). When
caffeine does this, dopamine action is enhanced and this
is wake-promoting and reduces fatigue (Figure 10-59C).
Amphetamine and Methylphenidate

Wake promotion from enhancing the wake-promoting
neurotransmitters dopamine and norepinephrine is
classically done with amphetamines and methylphenidate
(Figure 10-60). Because this is activating, wakepromoting, and fatigue-reducing, the effects of
amphetamines and methylphenidate are stimulating,
and these drugs have classically been called stimulants.
Here we will refer to these agents by their properties as

norepinephrine–dopamine reuptake inhibitors and, in
the case of the amphetamines, as dopamine releasers and
competitive VMAT2 inhibitors as well. VMAT2 inhibition
was discussed in Chapter 5 and illustrated in Figures
5-10A and 5-10B. Norepinephrine–dopamine reuptake
inhibition as an antidepressant mechanism was discussed
in Chapter 7 and illustrated in Figures 7-34 through 7-36.
D-amphetamine, DL-amphetamine, and methylphenidate
are all approved for use specifically as wake-promoting
agents in the treatment of narcolepsy, but not in
obstructive sleep apnea or shift work disorder, although
often used “off-label” for these indications. Many
formulations of both amphetamine and methylphenidate
441




<<<PAGE 458>>>

STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Amphetamine and Methylphenidate
amphetamine
methylphenidate

Figure 10-60 Amphetamine and methylphenidate. Amphetamine and methylphenidate are both norepinephrine (left) and dopamine
(right) reuptake inhibitors; amphetamine has the additional property of inhibition of the vesicular monoamine transporter 2 (VMAT2),
which can lead to dopamine release. Enhancing these neurotransmitters in sleep/wake circuitry (far right) can be wake-promoting and
fatigue-reducing; thus, they are both approved for excessive daytime sleepiness in narcolepsy and used off-label in other conditions
associated with hypersomnia.

are now available for the treatment of ADHD and are
reviewed in detail in Chapter 11 (see Figures 11-9, 11-10,
11-33, 11-35, and 11-36) and in Chapter 13 on substance
abuse (see Figure 13-8).
Amphetamine and methylphenidate can be dosed to
treat sleepiness in narcolepsy in order to enhance the
synaptic availability of the wake-promoting and arousal
neurotransmitters dopamine and norepinephrine and
thereby improve wakefulness in narcolepsy without
causing significant reinforcement (Figure 10-60).
Nevertheless, amphetamine and methylphenidate
are controlled substances because of high abuse and
diversion potential, as well as the possibility of inducing
psychosis, mania, high blood pressure, and other side
effects, especially at doses higher than those used to treat
sleepiness or ADHD (discussed in Chapters 11 and 13).
However, they are highly effective agents to promote
wakefulness in narcolepsy.
Modafinil/Armodafinil
Mechanism of Action

Racemic modafinil and its R enantiomer armodafinil
(Figure 10-61) are wake-promoting agents not only
442

approved for the treatment of narcolepsy, but also as
adjunctive treatments for obstructive sleep apnea and
for shift work disorder. These agents are thought to act
predominantly as inhibitors of the dopamine transporter
(DAT) or dopamine (DA) reuptake pump (Figure
10-62). Although modafinil is a weak DAT inhibitor,
the concentrations of the drug achieved after oral
dosing are quite high, and sufficient to have substantial
actions on DATs. In fact, the pharmacokinetics of
modafinil suggest that this drug acts via a slow rise in
plasma levels, sustained plasma levels for 6–8 hours,
and incomplete occupancy of DAT, all properties that
could be ideal for enhancing tonic dopamine activity
to promote wakefulness (Figure 10-63) rather than
phasic dopamine activity to promote reinforcement
and abuse (see Chapter 11 on ADHD and Figures 11-9,
11-10, 11-33, 11-35, and 11-36 as well as Chapter 13 on
substance abuse and Figure 13-8). Once dopamine release
is activated by modafinil, and the cortex is aroused, this
can apparently lead to downstream release of histamine
from the tuberomammillary nucleus (TMN) and then
further activation of the lateral hypothalamus with
orexin release to stabilize wakefulness (Figure 10-63).




<<<PAGE 459>>>

Chapter 10: Disorders of Sleep and Wakefulness and Their Treatment

Figure 10-61 Modafinil and
armodafinil. Modafinil consists of two
enantiomers, R and S; the R enantiomer
has been developed and marketed
as armodafinil. Both modafinil
and armodafinil are thought to act
predominantly as inhibitors of the
dopamine transporter (DAT).

T
DA

TA
D

R modafinil

However, the activation of the lateral hypothalamus
and release of orexin do not appear to be necessary for
the action of modafinil, since modafinil still promotes
wakefulness in patients who have loss of hypothalamic
orexin neurons in narcolepsy. The activation of TMN
and lateral hypothalamic neurons may be secondary and
downstream actions resulting from modafinil’s effects on
dopamine neurons.
A related wake-promoting agent is the R enantiomer
of modafinil, called armodafinil (Figure 10-61).
Armodafinil has a later time to peak levels, a longer
half-life, and higher plasma drug levels 6–14 hours
after oral administration than racemic modafinil.
The pharmacokinetic properties of armodafinil could
theoretically improve the clinical profile of modafinil,
with greater activation of phasic dopamine firing,
possibly eliminating the need for a second daily dose, as
is often required with racemic modafinil.
Narcolepsy

Modafinil/armodafinil are effective treatments of
sleepiness in narcolepsy, although possibly not as
powerful as amphetamine and methylphenidate.
However, head-to-head trials have not been conducted.
Furthermore, the abuse potential of modafinil/
armodafinil is much reduced compared to amphetamine
and methylphenidate, and the side effects are not as
severe. In addition, both modafinil and armodafinil
are approved for treatment of two additional disorders

S modafinil

for which amphetamine and methylphenidate are
not approved, namely, for shift work disorder and as
adjunctive treatment for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA).
Obstructive Sleep Apnea

First-line treatment for OSA (Figure 10-49) is continuous
positive airway pressure (CPAP) (Figure 10-64). Although
CPAP treatment is quite effective and has been shown
to reduce hospitalization rates and healthcare costs,
adherence rates are poor (54%). For patients who find
CPAP intolerable, there are other treatment options that
may be considered, including bilevel positive airway
pressure (BPAP), auto-titrating positive airway pressure
(APAP), oral appliances designed to stabilize the jaw
and/or tongue during sleep, and various surgeries aimed
at correcting physical attributes that may contribute to
OSA. Additionally, several behavioral interventions may
be useful for ameliorating OSA; these include weight
loss (to a BMI <25), exercise, the avoidance of alcohol
and sedatives at bedtime, and positional therapy (i.e.,
the use of a backpack or other object that prevents the
patient from sleeping on their back). Modafinil and
armodafinil are approved specifically as adjuncts to
standard treatment of underlying airway obstruction,
which is frequently inadequate to treat the hypersomnia
associated with OSA. Given the low adherence rates to
CPAP, modafinil/armodafinil are sometimes used “offlabel” for OSA as monotherapies for patients who do not
tolerate CPAP.
443

10




<<<PAGE 460>>>

STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Mechanism of Action of
Modafinil/Armodafinil

DA reuptake
pump

modafinil

DA

when needing to function during the daytime when
sleepy. Exposure to light alters circadian rhythms and
suppresses melatonin release. Treatment with 10,000
lux, bright, blue light for 30 minutes a day may be used
to reset circadian rhythms (Figure 10-56). Importantly,
the administration of bright light therapy must be
appropriately timed in accordance with the patient’s
circadian phase of melatonin secretion, with light
administration occurring approximately 8 hours after
evening melatonin secretion (possibly amplified by
oral dosing with a melatonin agent, Figure 10-57) or
in accordance with a predetermined bright light phase
response curve. One form of bright light therapy, dawn
simulation therapy, applies a slow, incremental light
signal at the end of the sleep cycle. Data show that
performance, alertness, and mood during the night shift
can be improved in shift workers using bright light reentrainment of circadian rhythms.
Solriamfetol, a Wake-Promoting NDRI

+
+
+
+
increase in tonic firing,
downstream increase in HA
and activation of wake-related
circuits
Figure 10-62 Mechanism of action of modafinil/
armodafinil. Modafinil and armodafinil bind with weak affinity
for the dopamine transporter (DAT); however, their plasma
levels are high and this compensates for the low binding.
Increased synaptic dopamine (DA) following blockade of DAT
leads to increased tonic firing and downstream effects on
neurotransmitters involved in wakefulness, including histamine
(HA) and orexin/hypocretin.

Shift Work Disorder

Shift work disorder (Figure 10-51) can be tricky to
treat, especially if the patient has an ever-evolving and
unstable shift work schedule. Suffice it to say, shift
workers are frequently sleepy, but still must work,
drive, and function. Modafinil/armodafinil can make
a big difference in an individual’s ability to function
with alertness when suffering from shift work disorder.
Supplementing modafinil/armodafinil with circadian
rhythm adjunctive therapy is often helpful (Figure
10-55). This includes trying to reset the biological
clock with morning light (Figure 10-56), especially
444

Solriamfetol is a recently approved agent for daytime
sleepiness, both in patients with narcolepsy and as an
adjunct to mechanical treatments for airway obstruction
in patients with OSA. It works by norepinephrine and
dopamine reuptake inhibition (see Chapter 7 and Figures
7-34 through 7-36), and seems to be more potent than
bupropion in this aspect, and less potent but more tolerable
and less abusable than amphetamines or methylphenidate.
Its short half-life is consistent with morning dosing wearing
off in time for sleep.
Pitolisant, H3 Presynaptic Antagonist

Pitolisant (Figure 10-65) is a drug with a novel
mechanism for improving wakefulness in narcolepsy
by blocking the normal action of presynaptic H3
autoreceptors (Figure 10-66A,B) to inhibit histamine
release. Inhibiting the presynaptic H3 receptor causes
the disinhibition (that is, the release) of presynaptic
histamine (Figure 10-66C), and this is wake-promoting.
Pitolisant, a presynaptic H3 autoreceptor antagonist
(Figures 10-65 and 10-66C), is approved for the treatment
of narcolepsy, and there are anecdotal observations that
it may be effective in cataplexy as well. Pitolisant is not a
controlled substance and has no known abuse potential
and is in testing for improving excessive daytime
sleepiness in OSA. Pitolisant can be overly activating,
causing anxiety or insomnia. Studies suggest it may
be about as effective as modafinil but perhaps not as
effective as amphetamine/methylphenidate for improving
excessive daytime sleepiness.




<<<PAGE 485>>>

Chapter 11: Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder and Its Treatment

Effects of Chronic Stress in ADHD
ADHD and Stress: Hypothetically Low
Signals and/or High Noise in PFC

A

signal

fidget /
shift attention

NE concentration

PFC strength of output

noise

PFC strength of output

At first, high NE and DA
PFC

DA concentration

NE high - signal reduced
DA high - noise increased

sit in seat /
focus

Chronic Stress

noise

B

signal

fidget /
shift attention

NE concentration

PFC strength of output

PFC

PFC strength of output

Eventually, NE and DA depletion

Figure 11-27 Chronic stress in
ADHD. Excessive activation of
norepinephrine (NE) and dopamine
(DA) in the prefrontal cortex (PFC) can
lead to ADHD by increasing the noise
and decreasing the signal. (A) At first,
the added stress of suffering from the
disorder can further dial up the noise
and reduce the signal (high NE and DA
concentration leading to decreased
output). (B) As chronic stress sets in,
NE and DA levels plummet (low NE
and DA concentration also leading to
decreased output), but with no relief in
terms of signal output. (C) Treatments
that increase NE and DA concentrations
may reduce symptoms by increasing
strength output (noise is reduced and
signal is increased).

DA concentration

NE low - signal reduced
DA low - noise increased

sit in seat /
focus

noise

C

fidget /
shift attention

signal

sit in seat /
focus

NE concentration

PFC strength of output

PFC

PFC strength of output

Treatment: Increase NE, Increase DA

DA concentration

NE optimized - signal increased
DA optimized - noise reduced

order to treat their ADHD. In these cases, augmenting
antidepressant or anxiolytic therapies with a tonic
activator of DA and/or NE systems, such as a longlasting norepinephrine transport (NET) inhibitor or an
α2A-adrenergic agonist, rather than a stimulant, can be
an effective long-term approach for comorbid anxiety,
depression, or substance abuse with ADHD. Some
studies of NET inhibitors report improvement in both
ADHD and anxiety symptoms, and other studies report
improvement in both ADHD and heavy drinking.
Methylphenidate

The mechanism of action of the so-called stimulants
– perhaps better designated as norepinephrine and
dopamine reuptake blockers – is shown in Figures 11-28
through Figure 11-37. Oral administration of clinically
approved doses of the stimulant methylphenidate blocks

the transporters both for NE and DA (NETs and DATs,
respectively) (Figures 11-28 and 11-29A–C). Normally,
DA is released (arrow 1 in Figure 11-29A), and then
taken back up into the dopaminergic neuron by DATs
(arrows 2 in Figure 11-29A), and finally stored in the
synaptic vesicle by VMATs (arrows 3 in Figure 11-29A).
Methylphenidate blocks DATs and NETs allosterically,
stopping the reuptake of DA via DATs (Figure 11-29B)
and NE via NETs (Figure 11-29C), with no actions on
VMAT2 (Figures 11-29B and 11-29C). Methylphenidate
blocks NETs and DATs in much the same way as reuptake
blockers used to treat depression (see discussion in
Chapter 7 and Figure 7-36), namely by binding to NETs
and DATs at sites distinct from where monoamines bind
NETs and DATs, i.e., allosterically. Thus, methylphenidate
stops the reuptake pumps so that no methylphenidate is

469

11




<<<PAGE 486>>>

STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

transported into the presynaptic neuron (Figure 11-29B
and 11-29C).
Methylphenidate has a D- and an L-isomer (Figure
11-28), with the D-isomer being much more potent
than the L-isomer on both NET and DAT binding.

Methylphenidate is also available as the single enantiomer
D-methylphenidate, in both immediate-release and
controlled-release preparations. A listing of the wide range
of D,L-methylphenidate preparations is shown in Table 111, and those for D-methylphenidate shown in Table 11-2.

Table 11-1 D,L-Methylphenidate formulations

Formulation

Brand names

Duration

Dosing

Approval

Immediate-release
tablet

Ritalin

Early peak, 3–4-hr
duration

Second dose at
lunch

Ages 6 to 12 and
adults

Immediate-release
oral solution

Methylin

Early peak, 3–4-hr
duration

Second dose at
lunch

Ages 6 to 12

Extended-release
tablet

Ritalin SR
Methylin ER
Metadate ER

Early peak, 3–8-hr
duration

Lunch dosing
may be needed

Ages 6 and older

Extended-release
tablet

Concerta

Small early peak, 12-hr
duration

Once daily in the
morning

Ages 6 and older

Extended-release
chewable tablet

QuilliChew ER

Peak at 5 hr, 8-hr duration

Once daily in the
morning

Ages 6 and older

Extended-release
capsule

Metadate CD

Strong early peak,
8-hr duration

Once daily in the
morning

Ages 6 to 17

Extended-release
capsule

Ritalin LA

Two strong peaks (early
and at 4 hrs), 6–8-hr
duration

Once daily in the
morning

Age 6 to 12

Extended-release
capsule

Aptensio XR

Up to 12-hr duration

Once daily in the
morning

Ages 6 and older

Extended-release oral
suspension

Quillivant XR

Peak at 5 hr, 12-hr
duration

Once daily in the
morning

Ages 6 and older

Extended-release
transdermal patch

Daytrana

One peak at 7–10 hrs, 12hr duration

Once daily in the
morning

Ages 6 to 17

Orally disintegrating
tablet

Cotempla XR-ODT

12-hr duration

Once daily in the
morning

Ages 6 to 17

Extended-release
capsule

Jornay PM

Initial absorption delayed
by 10 hrs, single peak at
14 hrs

Once daily in the
evening

Ages 6 and older

Extended-release
capsule

Adhansia XR

Two peaks (at 1.5 and 12
hrs)

Once daily in the
morning

Ages 6 and older

Table 11-2 D-Methylphenidate formulations

Formulation

Brand Names

Duration

Dosing

Approval

Immediate-release
tablet

Focalin

Early peak, 4–6-hr
duration

Second dose at lunch

Ages 6 to 17

Extended-release
capsule

Focalin XR

Two peaks (after 1.5 and
6.5 hrs), 8–10-hr duration

Once daily in the
morning

Ages 6 to 17
and adults

470




<<<PAGE 487>>>

Chapter 11: Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder and Its Treatment

Figure 11-28 D,L-methylphenidate. Methylphenidate consists
of two enantiomers, D and L; both racemic D,L-methylphenidate
and D-methylphenidate are available as therapeutic options.
D,L-methylphenidate and D-methylphenidate both block the
norepinephrine transporter (NET) and the dopamine transporter
(DAT). D-methylphenidate has greater potency for both
transporters than does the L enantiomer.

D,L-Methylphenidate

NET

TEN

DAT

TAD

L-methylphenidate

D-methylphenidate

Regulation of the Transport and
Availability of Synaptic DA

3

VMAT
3

Figure 11-29A Regulation of
transport and availability of synaptic
dopamine. The regulation of synaptic
dopamine (DA) is dependent upon
proper functioning of two transporters,
namely the dopamine transporter
(DAT) and the vesicular monoamine
transporter (VMAT). After DA is released
(1) it can act at postsynaptic receptors
or it can be transported back into the
terminal via DATs (2). Once inside the
terminal, DA is “encapsulated” into
vesicles via VMAT (3). These DAfilled vesicles can then merge with
the membrane and lead to more DA
release. This finely tuned machinery
ensures that DA levels never reach
toxic levels in the synapse or in the DA
terminal. By “engulfing” DA into vesicles
it is possible for the DA neuron to
ensure the viability of DA.

2
3

11
2
1

dopamine (DA)

A

2

1 = release of DA
2 = DAT transport of DA
3 = VMAT transport of DA

471




<<<PAGE 488>>>

STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Mechanism of Action of Methylphenidate

Mechanism of Action of Methylphenidate

DA neuron

NE neuron

B

methylphenidate

Figure 11-29B Mechanism of action of methylphenidate at
dopamine neurons. Methylphenidate blocks the reuptake of
dopamine (DA) into the terminal by binding at an allosteric
site (i.e., different than the DA binding site). Methylphenidate
basically stops the transporter, preventing DA reuptake and thus
leading to increased synaptic availability of DA.

Amphetamine

Oral administration of clinically approved doses of the
stimulant amphetamine, like methylphenidate, also
blocks the transporters both for NE and DA (NETs
and DATs), but in a different manner (Figures 11-30
through 11-32). Unlike methylphenidate and reuptake
blocking drugs used for depression, amphetamine is
a competitive inhibitor and pseudosubstrate for NETs
and DATs (Figure 11-32, top left), binding at the same
site that the monoamines bind to the transporters, thus
inhibiting NE and DA reuptake (Figure 11-32, top left).
At the doses of amphetamine used for the treatment of
ADHD, the clinical differences between the actions of
amphetamine versus methylphenidate can be relatively
small. However, at the high doses of amphetamine
used by stimulant addicts, additional pharmacological
actions of amphetamine are triggered. Following
competitive inhibition of DATs (Figure 11-32, top left)
amphetamine is actually transported as a hitch-hiker
into the presynaptic DA terminal, an action not shared
by methylphenidate or reuptake blocking drugs used
for depression (Figure 11-32, top left). Once there in
sufficient quantities, such as occurs at doses taken for
abuse, amphetamine is also a competitive inhibitor of

472

C

methylphenidate

Figure 11-29C Mechanism of action of methylphenidate
at norepinephrine neurons. Methylphenidate blocks the
reuptake of norepinephrine (NE) into the terminal by binding
at an allosteric site (i.e., different than the NE binding site).
Methylphenidate basically stops the transporter, preventing NE
reuptake and thus leading to increased synaptic availability of
NE.

the vesicular transporter (VMAT2) for both DA and NE
(Figure 11-32, top right). Once amphetamine hitchhikes another ride into synaptic vesicles, it displaces
DA there, causing a flood of DA release (Figure 11-32,
bottom left). As DA accumulates in the cytoplasm of
the presynaptic neuron, it causes the DATs to reverse
directions, spilling intracellular DA into the synapse,
and also opening presynaptic channels to further
release DA in a flood into the synapse (Figure 1132, bottom right). These pharmacological actions of
high-dose amphetamine are not linked to therapeutic
action in ADHD but to reinforcement, reward, and
euphoria in amphetamine abuse. Actions of highdose amphetamine, methamphetamine, and cocaine
(another inhibitor of DATs), given orally in immediaterelease formulations, or intranasally, intravenously, or
smoked, are discussed further in Chapter 13 on drug
abuse.
Amphetamine has a D- and an L-isomer (Figure
11-30). The D-isomer of amphetamine is more potent
than the L-isomer for DAT binding, but D- and Lamphetamine isomers are more equally potent in
their actions on NET binding. Thus, D-amphetamine
preparations will have relatively more action on DATs




<<<PAGE 490>>>

STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Mechanism of Action of Amphetamine:
The Yin and the Yang

3

2

VMAT

3

2
1 = competitive inhibition
2 = DAT transport of
amphetamine

4

1

3 = VMAT transport of
amphetamine

4
4
4

6
4

5

4

4 = amphetamine
displacement
of dopamine

5 = high DA opens channel
and spills out
6 = high DA reverse
transports DA out

5

6

Figure 11-32 Mechanism of action of amphetamine at dopamine (DA) neurons. Amphetamine is a competitive inhibitor at the
dopamine transporter (DAT), thus blocking DA from binding (1). This is unlike methylphenidate’s actions at DATs and NETs, which are
not competitive. Additionally, since amphetamine is also a competitive inhibitor of VMAT (a property that methylphenidate lacks) it is
actually taken into the DA terminal via DATs (2), where it can then be packaged into vesicles (3). At high levels, amphetamine will lead to
the displacement of DA from the vesicles into the terminal (4). Furthermore, once a critical threshold of DA has been reached, DA will be
expelled from the terminal via two mechanisms: the opening of channels to allow for a massive dumping of DA into the synapse (5) and
the reversal of DATs (6). This fast release of DA will lead to the euphoric effect experienced after amphetamine use. Amphetamine has
these same actions at noradrenergic neurons.

offset is also seen in another area of psychopharmacology,
namely, for treatments of insomnia discussed in Chapter
10 and illustrated in Figure 10-41A. A similar idea is
illustrated here, with a minimum threshold for ADHD
therapeutic action, probably around 50–60% DAT
occupancy (Figure 11-34).
This property of DAT targeting for ADHD above a
critical threshold is so prominent that it has spawned
an entire industry of technologies in an attempt to
474

capture the best way to attain, sustain, and drop below
the threshold in just the exact manner desired. There are
over two dozen versions of the two stimulant molecules
methylphenidate and amphetamine now available for
clinical use (Tables 11-1 through 11-4) and several
more in development. Each version tries to capture the
ideal drug delivery for the ideal DAT occupancy for a
given patient type (e.g., Figure 11-34B). That usually
takes the form of rapidly getting above threshold levels




<<<PAGE 492>>>

STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

“Slow-Dose” Stimulants Amplify Tonic NE and DA Signals
nucleus accumbens

PFC

NE
neuron

DA
neuron

VMAT2

DA
neuron

VMAT2

VMAT2
NET

D >> L methylphenidate
D = L amphetamine

NE

α2A

D1

+

+

+
+
+

DA

DA

DAT

D >> L methylphenidate
D > L amphetamine

D1 D2

+
+
+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

slow-dose stimulants
OROS - methylphenidate, LA - methylphenidate, XR - D-methylphenidate, transdermal methylphenidate
D-amphetamine spansules, XR - D,L mixed amphetamine salts, prodrug D-amphetamine (lisdexamfetamine)
Figure 11-33 Slow-dose stimulants amplify tonic norepinephrine (NE) and dopamine (DA) signals. Hypothetically, whether a drug
has abuse potential depends on how it affects the DA pathway. In other words, the pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic properties
of stimulants affect their therapeutic as well as their potential abuse profiles. Extended-release formulations of oral stimulants, the
transdermal methylphenidate patch, and the prodrug lisdexamfetamine are all considered “slow-dose” stimulants and may amplify tonic
NE and DA signals, presumed to be low in ADHD. These agents block the norepinephrine transporters (NETs) in the prefrontal cortex
and the DA transporters (DATs) in the nucleus accumbens. Hypothetically, the “slow-dose” stimulants occupy NETs in the prefrontal
cortex (PFC) with slow enough onset, and for long enough duration, that they enhance tonic NE and DA signaling via α2A and D1
postsynaptic receptors, respectively, but they do not occupy DATs quickly or extensively enough in the nucleus accumbens to increase
phasic signaling via D2 receptors. The latter hypothetically suggests reduced abuse potential.

in ADHD (and excessive daytime sleepiness). Likely
these therapeutic actions may be linked to judicious
and controlled enhancement of phasic dopamine
neurotransmission, along with a boost in tonic dopamine
neurotransmission, both of which may be theoretically
somewhat deficient in ADHD and sleepiness.
One last piece of the puzzle. How can the DAT target
that is therapeutic immediately for ADHD and sleepiness
and with a delay for depression lead to problematic drug
abuse rather than therapeutic use? This only makes sense
if you are aware that the DAT functions very differently
depending upon how fast, how completely, and how long
you engage it (compare Figures 11-35 pulsatile action
with Figure 11-33 sustained action). That is, rapid and
high degrees of DAT occupancy cause euphoria and lead
to abuse and addiction (Figure 11-35; see also Chapter 13
476

and Figure 13-7). In fact, the more rapidly and completely
the DATs are blocked, the more reinforcing and abusable
a drug will be. This applies not only to methylphenidate,
modafinil, and amphetamine as DAT blockers, but also
to methamphetamine and cocaine that are also DAT
blockers. Oral ingestion can get a DAT inhibitor to the
brain, but not as fast as snorting nasally, and not as fast as
intravenously, and certainly not as fast as smoking. High
dosing especially by these other routes of administration
provides complete, catastrophic, and sudden blockade
of DATs. The rapid build-up of synaptic dopamine
(Figure 11-35) is nothing like what is seen with more
gradual, sustained, and lower levels of DAT occupancy
(Figure 11-33). In fact, dopamine levels can build up so
high that the DATs can actually be reversed to transport
dopamine out of the presynaptic terminal to add to the




<<<PAGE 494>>>

STAHL’S ESSENTIAL PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

Pulsatile Stimulants Amplify Tonic
and Phasic NE and DA Signals
nucleus accumbens

PFC

NE
neuron

DA
neuron

amphetamine

DA
neuron

DAT

NET

methylphenidate

NE

α1

α2A α2A α 1

DA

D1 D1

D1

++ ++
++ ++

+

+

++
++

+

+

+

+

+

++
++

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

++
++

amphetamine

+

+

+

+

+

+

D1

++ ++
++ ++
++ ++
++ ++

methylphenidate

D1 D2 D1 D2 D1 D2
+ +
+ +
+ +

++ ++ ++ ++
++ ++ ++ ++
++ ++ ++ ++
++ ++ ++ ++

++ ++ ++ ++
+ + ++ ++ ++ ++

pulsatile stimulants
oral immediate-release, intravenous, intranasal, smoked, D-amphetamine,
D,L amphetamine salts, methylphenidate, D-methylphenidate, cocaine,
methamphetamine
Figure 11-35 Pulsatile stimulants amplify tonic and phasic norepinephrine (NE) and dopamine (DA) signals. Hypothetically, whether
a drug has abuse potential depends on how it affects the DA pathway. In other words, the pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic
properties of stimulants affect their therapeutic as well as their potential abuse profiles. Immediate-release oral stimulants – similarly to
intravenous, smoked, or snorted stimulants (which are considered pulsatile stimulants) – lead to a rapid increase in NE and DA levels
through blockade of the norepinephrine transporters (NETs) in the prefrontal cortex (PFC) and the DA transporters (DATs) in the nucleus
accumbens. Rapidly amplifying the phasic neuronal firing of DA in the nucleus accumbens is associated with euphoria and abuse. The
abuse potential of immediate-release formulations of methylphenidate and amphetamine may be due to increased phasic as well as
tonic DA signaling.

massive release of dopamine from sudden, complete,
and catastrophic DAT blockade (discussed earlier in this
chapter and illustrated in Figure 11-32, bottom right).
So, understanding how a more gentle and prudent
administration of DAT inhibition can be therapeutic
whereas the same drug can be disastrous can allow
the best judicious administration of a DAT inhibitor.
Be careful, and don’t mess incorrectly with your DAT!
Mystery solved.
Slow-Release Versus Fast-Release Stimulants

Based upon now having solved the mystery of the DAT,
many drug delivery systems are not only designed to
control how much DAT inhibition there is, and for how
478

long, but also how quickly the DAT is inhibited, all to
maximize therapeutic effects in ADHD and minimize
abuse and side effects (Figure 11-36 and Tables 111 through 11-4). The goal is to enhance phasic DA
neurotransmission with low to moderate, continuous
drug delivery (Figure 11-36, top), trying to increase
mostly tonic DA firing and only judiciously to increase
phasic DA firing, recognizing that this may be playing
a bit with fire. In order not to get burned, as happens
with pulsatile drug delivery in drug abuse situations
(see Figure 11-36, bottom), to achieve prudent and
therapeutic improvement of tonic and phasic DA
neurotransmission without disastrous increases in
phasic DA neurotransmission, leading to abuse and




<<<PAGE 613>>>

Suggested Reading and Selected References

Thomas RJ, Rosen BR, Stern CE, Weiss JW, Kwong KK (2005)
Functional imaging of working memory in obstructive
sleep-disordered breathing. J Appl Physiol 98: 2226–34.
Thorpy MJ, Dauvilliers Y (2015) Clinical and practical
consideration in the pharmacologic management of
narcolepsy. Sleep Med 16: 9–18.
Trotti LM, Saini P, Bliwise DL, et al. (2015) Clarithromycin in
gamma-aminobutyric acid-related hypersomnolence: a
randomized, crossover trial. Ann Neurol 78: 454–65.
Trotti LM, Saini P, Freeman AA, et al. (2013) Improvement
in daytime sleepiness with clarithromycin in patients
with GABA-related hypersomnia: clinical experience. J
Psychopharmacol 28: 697–702.
Van Someren EJ, Riemersma-Van Der Lek RF (2007) Live
to the rhythm, slave to the rhythm. Sleep Med Rev 11:
465–84.
Wulff K, Gatti S, Wettstein JG, Foster RG (2010) Sleep
and circadian rhythm disruption in psychiatric and
neurodegenerative disease. Nat Rev Neurosci 11: 589–99.
Zaharna M, Dimitriu A, Guilleminault C (2010) Expert
opinion on pharmacotherapy of narcolepsy. Expert Opin
Pharmacother 11: 1633–45.
Zawilska JB, Skene DJ, Arendt J. (2009) Physiology and
pharmacology of melatonin in relation to biological
rhythms. Pharmacol Rep 61: 383–410.

Chapter 11 (Attention Deficit
Hyperactivity Disorder)
Arnsten AFT (2006) Fundamentals of attention deficit/
hyperactivity disorder: circuits and pathways. J Clin
Psychiatry 67 (Suppl 8): 7–12.
Arnsten AFT (2006) Stimulants: therapeutic actions in ADHD.
Neuropsychopharmacology 31: 2376–83.
Arnsten AFT (2009) Stress signaling pathways that impair
prefrontal cortex structure and function. Nat Rev Neurosci
10: 410–22.
Arnsten AFT, Li BM (2005) Neurobiology of executive
functions: catecholamine influences on prefrontal cortical
functions. Biol Psychiatry 57: 1377–84.
Avery RA, Franowicz JS, Phil M, et al. (2000) The alpha 2a
adrenoceptor agonist, guanfacine, increases regional
cerebral blood flow in dorsolateral prefrontal cortex of
monkeys performing a spatial working memory task.
Neuropsychopharmacology 23: 240–9.
Berridge CW, Devilbiss DM, Andrzejewski ME, et al. (2006)
Methylphenidate preferentially increases catecholamine
neurotransmission within the prefrontal cortex at low
doses that enhance cognitive function. Biol Psychiatry 60:
1111–20.

Berridge CW, Shumsky JS, Andrzejewski ME, et al. (2012)
Differential sensitivity to psychostimulants across
prefrontal cognitive tasks: differential involvement of
noradrenergic α1- and α2-receptors. Biol Psychiatry 71:
467–73.
Biederman J (2004) Impact of comorbidity in adults with
attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder. J Clin Psychiatry 65
(Suppl 3): 3–7.
Biederman J, Petty CR, Fried R, et al. (2007) Stability of
executive function deficits into young adult years: a
prospective longitudinal follow-up study of grown up
males with ADHD. Acta Psychiatr Scand 116: 129–36.
Clerkin SM, Schulz KP, Halperin JM (2009) Guanfacine
potentiates the activation of prefrontal cortex evoked by
warning signals. Biol Psychiatry 66: 307–12.
Cortese S, Adamo N, Del Giovane C, et al. (2018) Comparative
efficacy and tolerability of medications for attention deficit
hyperactivity disorder in children, adolescents, and adults:
a systematic review and network meta-analysis. Lancet
Psychiatry 5: 727–38.
Easton N, Shah YB, Marshall FH, Fone KC, Marsden CA
(2006) Guanfacine produces differential effects in frontal
cortex compared with striatum: assessed by phMRI BOLD
contrast. Psychopharmacology 189: 369–85.
Faraone SV, Biederman J, Spencer T (2006) Diagnosing adult
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: are late onset
and subthreshold diagnoses valid? Am J Psychiatry 163:
1720–9.
Franke B, Nucgekubu G, Asherson P, et al. (2018) Live fast,
die young? A review on the developmental trajectories of
ADHD across the lifespan. Eur Neuropsychopharmacol 28:
1059–88.
Fusar-Poli P, Rubia K, Rossi G, Sartori G, Balottin U (2012)
Striatal dopamine transporter alterations in ADHD:
pathophysiology or adaptation to psychostimulants? a
meta-analysis. Am J Psychiatry 169: 264–72.
Grady M, Stahl SM (2012) A horse of a different color: how
formulation influences medication effects. CNS Spectrums
17: 63–9.
Hannestad J, Gallezot JD, Planeta-Wilson B, et al. (2010)
Clinically relevant doses of methylphenidate significantly
occupy norepinephrine transporters in humans in vivo.
Biol Psychiatry 68: 854–60.
Jakala P, Riekkinen M, Sirvio J, et al. (1999) Guanfacine, but
not clonidine, improves planning and working memory
performance in humans. Neuropsychopharmacology 20:
460–70.
Johnson K, Liranso T, Saylor K, et al. (2020) A phase II double
blind placebo controlled efficacy and safety study of SPN812 (extended release vilaxazine) in children with ADHD. J
Atten Disord 24: 348–58.
597




<<<PAGE 628>>>

Suggested Reading and Selected References

Ferris MJ, Calipari ES, Mateo Y, et al. (2012) Cocaine
self-administration produces pharmacodynamic
tolerance: differential effects on the potency of dopamine
transporter blockers, releasers, and methylphenidate.
Neuropsychopharmacology 37: 1708–16.

Selzer J (2006) Buprenorphine: reflections of an addictions
psychiatrist. J Clin Psychiatry 67: 1466–7.

Hart CL, Marvin CB, Silver R, Smith EE (2012) Is cognitive
functioning impaired in methamphetamine users? A
critical review. Neuropsychopharmacology 37: 586–608.

Wee S, Hicks MJ, De BP, et al. (2012) Novel cocaine vaccine
linked to a disrupted adenovirus gene transfer vector
blocks cocaine psychostimulant and reinforcing effects.
Neuropsychopharmacology 37: 1083–91.

Heinz A, Reimold M, Wrase J, et al. (2005) Stimulant actions
in rodents: implications for attention-deficit/hyperactivity
disorder treatment and potential substance abuse. Biol
Psychiatry 57: 1391–6.
Leyton M, Boileau I, Benkelfat C, et al. (2002) Amphetamineinduced increases in extracellular dopamine, drug wanting,
and novelty seeking: a PET/[11 C]raclopride study in
healthy men. Neuropsychopharmacology 27: 1027–35.
Lindsey KP, Wilcox KM, Votaw JR, et al. (2004) Effect
of dopamine transporter inhibitors on cocaine selfadministration in rhesus monkeys: relationship to
transporter occupancy determined by positron emission
tomography neuroimaging. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 309:
959–69.
Little KY, Krolewski DM, Zhang L, Cassin BJ (2003) Loss of
striatal vesicular monoamine transporter protein (VMAT2)
in human cocaine users. Am J Psychiatry 160: 47–55.
Livni E, Parasrampuria DA, Fischman AJ (2006) PET study
examining pharmacokinetics, detection and likeability, and
dopamine transporter receptor occupancy of short- and
long-acting oral methylphenidate. Am J Psychiatry 163:
387–95.
Martinez D, Narendran R, Foltin RW, et al. (2007)
Amphetamine-induced dopamine release: markedly
blunted in cocaine dependence and predictive of the choice
to self-administer cocaine. Am J Psychiatry 164: 622–9.
Narendran R, Lopresti BJ, Martinez D, et al. (2012) In vivo
evidence for low striatal vesicular monoamine transporter
2 (VMAT2) availability in cocaine abusers. Am J Psychiatry
169: 55–63.
Overtoom CCE, Bekker EM, van der Molen MW, et al. (2009)
Methylphenidate restores link between stop-signal sensory
impact and successful stopping in adults with attention
deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Biol Psychiatry 65: 614–19.
Peng, XO, Xi ZX, Li X, et al. (2010) Is slow-onset long-acting
monoamine transport blockade to cocaine as methadone
is to heroin? Implication for anti-addiction medications.
Neuropsychopharmacology 35: 2564–78.
Santos MD, Salery M, Forget B, et al. (2017) Rapid
synaptogenesis in the nucleus accumbens is induced by a
single cocaine administration and stabilized by mitogenactivated protein kinase interacting kinase-1 activity. Biol
Psychiatry 82: 806–18.

612

Spencer TJ, Biederman J, Ciccone PE, et al. (2006) Stimulant
medications: how to minimize their reinforcing effects?
Am J Psychiatry 163: 359–61.

Substance Abuse: Hallucinogens,
Entactogens, Dissociatives
Brawley P, Dufield JC (1972) The pharmacology of
hallucinogens. Pharmacol Rev 34: 31–66.
Carhart-Harris RL, Goodwin GM (2017) The therapeutic
potential of psychedelic drugs: past, present and future.
Neuropsychopharmacology 42: 2105–13.
Carhart-Harris RL, Bolstridge M, Day CMG, et al.
(2018) Psilocybin with psychological support for
treatment-resistant depression: six month follow up.
Psychopharmacology 235: 399–408.
Carhart-Harris RL, Bolstridge M, Rucker J, et al. (2016)
Psilocybin with psychological support for treatmentresistant depression: an open label feasibility study. Lancet
Psychiatry 3: 619–27.
Carhart-Harris RL, Erritzoe D, Williams T, et al. (2012)
Neural correlates of the psychedelic state as determined
by fMRI studies with psilocybin. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
109: 2138–43.
Carhart-Harris RL, Leech R, Williams TM, et al. (2012)
Implications for psychedelic assisted psychotherapy:
a functional magnetic resonance imaging study with
psilocybin. Br J Psychiatry 200: 238–44.
DiIorio CR, Watkins TJ, Dietrich MS (2012) Evidence for
chronically altered serotonin function in the cerebral
cortex of female 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine
polydrug users. Arch Gen Psychiatry 69: 399–409.
Erritzoe D, Frokjaer VG, Holst KK, et al. (2011) In
vivo imaging of cerebral serotonin transporter
and serotonin 2a receptor binding in
3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA or
“Ecstasy”) and hallucinogen users. Arch Gen Psychiatry
68: 562–76.
Fantegrossi WE, Murnane KS, Reissig CJ (2008) The
behavioral pharmacology of hallucinogens. Biochem
Pharmacol 25: 17–33.
Feduccia AA, Mithoefer MC (2018) MDMA-assisted
psychotherapy for PTSD: are memory reconsolidation
and fear extinction underlying mechanisms. Prog
Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry 84: 221–8.


