<<<PAGE 393>>>

Chapter 8: Anxiety, Trauma, and Treatment

briefly in Chapter 7 and illustrated in Figures 7-87 and
7-88. Ketamine is more extensively discussed in Chapter
7 as well. Future research is trying to determine how
to use psychotherapy to provoke emotional memories
and reactivate them by producing a state where a
pharmacological agent such as a hallucinogen producing
a dissociative state, including ketamine as well as
psilocybin or MDMA, could be administered to disrupt
reconsolidation of these emotional memories and thereby
relieve symptoms of anxiety, trauma, re-experiencing
and other emotional memories of PTSD and anxiety
disorders, and existential distress in terminally ill patients.
These are early days in terms of applying this concept
in clinical settings, but this notion supports the growing
idea that psychotherapy and psychopharmacology can be
synergistic. Much more needs to be learned as to how to
exploit this theoretical synergy.

TREATMENTS FOR ANXIETY
DISORDER SUBTYPES
Generalized Anxiety Disorder

Psychopharmacological treatments for generalized
anxiety disorder overlap greatly with those for
other anxiety disorders and depression and include
SSRIs, SNRIs, benzodiazepines, buspirone, and α2δ
ligands such as pregabalin and gabapentin. While
benzodiazepines should not be prescribed to a patient
with generalized anxiety disorder who is abusing other
substances, particularly alcohol, benzodiazepines can
be useful in patients who are not substance abusers
for short terms when initiating an SSRI or SNRI, since
these serotonergic agents are often activating, difficult
to tolerate early in dosing, and have a delayed onset
of action. In other patients, benzodiazepines can be
useful to “top up” an SSRI or SNRI for patients who
have experienced only partial relief of symptoms and
have stabilized on SSRI/SNRI therapy. Benzodiazepines
can also be useful for occasional intermittent use when
symptoms surge and sudden relief is needed. Alpha-2delta ligands are a good alternative to benzodiazepines
in some patients. These ligands are approved for the
treatment of anxiety in Europe and other countries
but not in the US, yet can be useful “off-label” as
augmenting agents.
Other “off-label” treatments for anxiety can
include mirtazapine, trazodone, vilazodone, tricyclic
antidepressants, or even sedating antihistamines such as
hydroxyzine.

Panic Disorder

Panic attacks occur in many conditions, not just panic
disorder, and panic disorder is frequently comorbid with
the other anxiety disorders and with major depression.
It is thus not surprising that contemporary treatments
for panic disorder overlap significantly with those for
the other anxiety disorders and with those for major
depression. Treatments include SSRIs and SNRIs, as
well as benzodiazepines, and α2δ ligands. “Off-label”
treatments of panic attacks in anxiety disorders can also
include mirtazapine and trazodone. The monoamine
oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs), discussed in Chapter 7, are
much neglected in psychopharmacology in general and
for the treatment of treatment-resistant panic disorder in
particular. However, MAOIs can have powerful efficacy
in panic and should be considered when other agents
fail. Cognitive behavioral psychotherapy is both an
alternative or an augmentation to psychopharmacological
approaches, and can help modify cognitive distortions,
and, through exposure, diminish phobic avoidance
behaviors.
Social Anxiety Disorder

The treatment options for this anxiety disorder are
very similar to those for panic disorder with a few
noteworthy differences. The SSRIs and SNRIs and α2δ
ligands are certainly useful treatments, but the utility
of benzodiazepine is not as widely accepted as it might
be for generalized anxiety disorder and panic disorder.
There is also less evidence for the utility of older drugs for
depression for use in social anxiety disorder. Beta blockers,
sometimes with benzodiazepines, can be useful for some
patients with very discrete types of social anxiety, such
as performance anxiety. One drug that is (unfortunately)
quite effective but obviously should not be used is alcohol
for the treatment of social anxiety symptoms. Many
patients of course are aware of this and abuse alcohol
before they seek safer and more effective treatment.
Cognitive behavioral psychotherapy can be a powerful
intervention, sometimes better than drugs for certain
patients, and often helpful in combination with drugs.
PTSD

Although some treatments such as certain SSRIs are
approved for PTSD, psychopharmacological treatments
for PTSD are not as effective as these same treatments are
in anxiety disorders. Also, PTSD is so highly comorbid
that many of the psychopharmacological treatments
are more effectively aimed at comorbidities such as

377

8


