SOURCE: DailyMed setid 1ec15bce-8a50-9c9a-419a-11b9d58dc5b8
DRUG: chlorpromazine

DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION Adults Adjust dosage to individual and the severity of his condition, recognizing that the milligram for milligram potency relationship among all dosage forms has not been precisely established clinically. It is important to increase dosage until symptoms are controlled. Dosage should be increased more gradually in debilitated or emaciated patients. In continued therapy, gradually reduce dosage to the lowest effective maintenance level, after symptoms have been controlled for a reasonable period. Increase parenteral dosage only if hypotension has not occurred. Before using IM, see - Important Notes On Injection . ELDERLY PATIENTS In general, dosages in the lower range are sufficient for most elderly patients. Since they appear to be more susceptible to hypotension and neuromuscular reactions, such patients should be observed closely. Dosage should be tailored to the individual, response carefully monitored, and dosage adjusted accordingly. Dosage should be increased more gradually in elderly patients. PSYCHOTIC DISORDERS Increase dosage gradually until symptoms are controlled. Maximum improvement may not be seen for weeks or even months. Continue optimum dosage for 2 weeks; then gradually reduce dosage to the lowest effective maintenance level. Daily dosage of 200 mg is not unusual. Some patients require higher dosages (e.g., 800 mg daily is not uncommon in discharged mental patients). Hospitalized Patients: Acute Schizophrenic or Manic States IM: 25 mg (1 mL). If necessary, give additional 25 to 50 mg injection in 1 hour. Increase subsequent IM doses gradually over several days–up to 400 mg q4-6h in exceptionally severe cases–until patient is controlled. Usually the patient becomes quiet and cooperative within 24 to 48 hours and oral doses may be substituted. Prompt Control of Severe Symptoms IM: 25 mg (1 mL). If necessary, repeat in 1 hour. Subsequent doses should be oral, 25-50 mg tid. NAUSEA AND VOMITING IM: 25 mg (1 mL). If no hypotens
