SOURCE: DailyMed setid 167ee280-be68-4a28-a7d8-de41df14bc48
DRUG: diazepam

DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION and WARNINGS ). DESCRIPTION Each 5 mL of Diazepam Oral Solution contains: diazepam USP ....................................................... 5 mg Inactive Ingredients: Diazepam Oral Solution contains polyethylene glycol, propylene glycol, sorbitol solution, sodium citrate dihydrate, bitterness modifier flavor, anhydrous citric acid, peppermint flavor, FD&amp;C Red No. 40, D&amp;C Yellow No. 10, and purified water. Diazepam is a benzodiazepine derivative. Chemically, diazepam is 7-Chloro-1,3-dihydro-1-methyl-5-phenyl-2 H -1,4-benzodiazepin-2-one. It is a white to practically white powder, insoluble in water and has a molecular weight of 284.75. Its structural formula is as follows: CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY Diazepam is a benzodiazepine that exerts anxiolytic, sedative, muscle-relaxant, anticonvulsant and amnestic effects. Most of these effects are thought to result from a facilitation of the action of gamma aminobutyric acid (GABA), an inhibitory neurotransmitter in the central nervous system. Pharmacokinetics Absorption: After oral administration of diazepam, &gt; 90% of diazepam is absorbed and the average time to achieve peak plasma concentrations is 1 to 1.5 hours with a range of 0.25 to 2.5 hours. Absorption is delayed and decreased when administered with a moderate fat meal. In the presence of food, mean lag times are approximately 45 minutes as compared with 15 minutes when fasting. There is also an increase in the average time to achieve peak concentrations to about 2.5 hours in the presence of food as compared with 1.25 hours when fasting. This results in an average decrease in C max of 20% in addition to a 27% decrease in AUC (range 15% to 50%) when administered with food. Distribution: Diazepam and its metabolites are highly bound to plasma proteins (diazepam 98%). Diazepam and its metabolites cross the blood-brain and placental barriers and are also found in breast milk in concentrations approximately one tenth of those in maternal
