SOURCE: DailyMed setid b90f8ff4-4fb3-46ab-8149-cb55f24a4044
DRUG: disulfiram

DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION Disulfiram should never be administered until the patient has abstained from alcohol for at least 12 hours. Initial Dosage Schedule In the first phase of treatment, a maximum of 500 mg daily is given in a single dose for one to two weeks. Although usually taken in the morning, disulfiram may be taken on retiring by patients who experience a sedative effect. Alternatively, to minimize, or eliminate, the sedative effect, dosage may be adjusted downward. Maintenance Regimen The average maintenance dose is 250 mg daily (range, 125 mg to 500 mg), it should not exceed 500 mg daily. Note: Occasionally patients, while seemingly on adequate maintenance doses of disulfiram, report that they are able to drink alcoholic beverages with impunity and without any symptomatology. All appearances to the contrary, such patients must be presumed to be disposing of their tablets in some manner without actually taking them. Until such patients have been observed reliably taking their daily disulfiram tablets (preferably crushed and well mixed with liquid), it cannot be concluded that disulfiram is ineffective. Duration of Therapy The daily, uninterrupted administration of disulfiram must be continued until the patient is fully recovered socially and a basis for permanent self-control is established. Depending on the individual patient, maintenance therapy may be required for months or even years. Trial with Alcohol During early experience with disulfiram, it was thought advisable for each patient to have at least one supervised alcohol-drug reaction. More recently, the test reaction has been largely abandoned. Furthermore, such a test reaction should never be administered to a patient over 50 years of age. A clear, detailed and convincing description of the reaction is felt to be sufficient in most cases. However, where a test reaction is deemed necessary, the suggested procedure is as follows: After the first one to two weeks' therapy with 500 mg daily, a drink
