SOURCE: DailyMed setid f8ba014e-aea0-49bc-8345-4e0a384b484e
DRUG: fluphenazine

DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION: Fluphenazine Decanoate Injection may be given IM or SC. A dry syringe and needle of at least 21 gauge should be used. Use of a wet needle or syringe may cause the solution to become cloudy. To begin therapy with Fluphenazine Decanoate Injection, the following regimens are suggested: For most patients , a dose of 12.5 to 25 mg (0.5 to 1 mL) may be given to initiate therapy. The onset of action generally appears between 24 and 72 hours after injection and the effects of the drug on psychotic symptoms becomes significant within 48 to 96 hours. Subsequent injections and the dosage interval are determined in accordance with the patient’s response. When administered as maintenance therapy, a single injection may be effective in controlling schizophrenic symptoms up to four weeks or longer. The response to a single dose has been found to last as long as six weeks in a few patients on maintenance therapy. It may be advisable that patients who have no history of taking phenothiazines should be treated initially with a shorter-acting form of fluphenazine before administering the decanoate to determine the patient’s response to fluphenazine and to establish appropriate dosage. For psychotic patients who have been stabilized on a fixed daily dosage of Fluphenazine Hydrochloride Tablets, USP or Fluphenazine Hydrochloride Elixir, USP conversion of therapy from these short-acting oral forms to the long-acting Fluphenazine Decanoate Injection may be indicated. Appropriate dosage of Fluphenazine Decanoate Injection should be individualized for each patient and responses carefully monitored. No precise formula can be given to convert to use of Fluphenazine Decanoate Injection; however, a controlled multicentered study,* in patients receiving oral doses from 5 to 60 mg fluphenazine hydrochloride daily, showed that 20 mg fluphenazine hydrochloride daily was equivalent to 25 mg (1 mL) of Fluphenazine Decanoate Injection every three weeks. This represents an ap
