SOURCE: DailyMed setid 8bbd7e39-b9ab-4716-9522-aa8c4b92210e
DRUG: fluvoxamine

DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION Adults: Recommended starting dose is 100 mg at bedtime, with weekly increases of 50 mg as tolerated to maximum effect, not to exceed 300 mg/day ( 2.1 ). Pediatric patients naïve to fluvoxamine maleate: The lowest available dose of fluvoxamine maleate extended-release capsules may not be appropriate ( 2.2 ). Hepatically impaired: Decreased clearance may require modified dose and titration ( 2.3 ). Extended treatment: Adjust dose to maintain lowest effective dose; reassess patients periodically ( 2.4 ). Discontinuation: Gradual dose reduction is recommended ( 2.7 , see Warnings and Precautions [5.10] ). DOSAGE FORMS AND STRENGTHS Extended-Release Capsules: 100 mg and 150 mg ( 3 ) CONTRAINDICATIONS Coadministration of thioridazine, tizanidine, pimozide, alosetron, or ramelteon ( 4 ). Serotonin Syndrome and MAOIs: Do not use MAOIs intended to treat psychiatric disorders with fluvoxamine maleate extended-release capsules or within 14 days of stopping treatment with fluvoxamine maleate extended-release capsules. Do not use fluvoxamine maleate extended-release capsules within 14 days of stopping an MAOI intended to treat psychiatric disorders. In addition, do not start fluvoxamine maleate extended-release capsules in a patient who is being treated with linezolid or intravenous methylene blue ( 4.1 ). WARNINGS AND PRECAUTIONS Clinical Worsening/Suicide Risk: Monitor for clinical worsening of suicidal thoughts/behaviors especially during the initial months of therapy and at times of dose changes ( 5.1 ). Bipolar Disorder: Screen for bipolar disorder ( 5.1 ). Serotonin Syndrome : Serotonin syndrome has been reported with SSRIs and SNRIs, including fluvoxamine maleate extended-release capsules, both when taken alone, but especially when coadministered with other serotonergic agents. If such symptoms occur, discontinue fluvoxamine maleate extended-release capsules and serotonergic agents and initiate supportive treatment. If concomitant use of fluvoxam
