SOURCE: DailyMed setid 94021822-60cb-4da6-b809-f565e1d6452d
DRUG: prazosin

DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION ). Hypotension may develop in patients given prazosin hydrochloride who are also receiving a beta-blocker such as propranolol. If syncope occurs, the patient should be placed in the recumbent position and treated supportively as necessary. This adverse effect is self-limiting and in most cases does not recur after the initial period of therapy or during subsequent dose titration. Patients should always be started on the 1 mg capsules of prazosin hydrochloride. The 2 and 5 mg capsules are not indicated for initial therapy. More common than loss of consciousness are the symptoms often associated with lowering of the blood pressure, namely, dizziness and lightheadedness. The patient should be cautioned about these possible adverse effects and advised what measures to take should they develop. The patient should also be cautioned to avoid situations where injury could result should syncope occur during the initiation of prazosin hydrochloride therapy. Priapism Prolonged erections and priapism have been reported with alpha-1 blockers including prazosin in post marketing experience. In the event of an erection that persists longer than 4 hours, seek immediate medical assistance. If priapism is not treated immediately, penile tissue damage and permanent loss of potency could result. PRECAUTIONS General Intraoperative Floppy Iris Syndrome (IFIS) has been observed during cataract surgery in some patients treated with alpha-1 blockers. This variant of small pupil syndrome is characterized by the combination of a flaccid iris that billows in response to intraoperative irrigation currents, progressive intraoperative miosis despite preoperative dilation with standard mydriatic drugs, and potential prolapse of the iris toward the phacoemulsification incisions. The patient’s ophthalmologist should be prepared for possible modifications to the surgical technique, such as the utilization of iris hooks, iris dilator rings, or viscoelastic substances. There d
