SOURCE: DailyMed setid a4231f67-6c04-4ce6-8c3d-6db52afaadbe
DRUG: temazepam

DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION ), it is important to use the lowest possible effective dose. Elderly patients are especially at risk. Some of these changes may be characterized by decreased inhibition, e.g., aggressiveness and extroversion that seem out of character, similar to that seen with alcohol. Other kinds of behavioral changes can also occur, for example, bizarre behavior, agitation, hallucinations, and depersonalization. Complex behaviors such as "sleepdriving" (i.e., driving while not fully awake after ingestion of a sedativehypnotic, with amnesia for the event) have been reported. These events can occur in sedativehypnoticnaive as well as in sedative-hypnotic-experienced persons. Although behaviors such as sleep-driving may occur with temazepam alone at therapeutic doses, the use of alcohol and other CNS depressants with temazepam appears to increase the risk of such behaviors, as does the use of temazepam at doses exceeding the maximum recommended dose. Due to the risk to the patient and the community, discontinuation of temazepam should be strongly considered for patients who report a "sleep-driving" episode. Other complex behaviors (e.g., preparing and eating food, making phone calls, or having sex) have been reported in patients who are not fully awake after taking a sedative-hypnotic. As with sleepdriving, patients usually do not remember these events. Amnesia and other neuro-psychiatric symptoms may occur unpredictably. In primarily depressed patients, worsening of depression, including suicidal thinking has been reported in association with the use of sedative/hypnotics. It can rarely be determined with certainty whether a particular instance of the abnormal behaviors listed above is drug induced, spontaneous in origin, or a result of an underlying psychiatric or physical disorder. Nonetheless, the emergence of any new behavioral sign or symptom of concern requires careful and immediate evaluation. Withdrawal symptoms (of the barbiturate type) have occu
