SOURCE: DailyMed setid c2575a86-19e5-44df-8603-ff066bb9c9c5
DRUG: trifluoperazine

DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION-ADULTS Dosage should be adjusted to the needs of the individual. The lowest effective dosage should always be used. Dosage should be increased more gradually in debilitated or emaciated patients. When maximum response is achieved, dosage may be reduced gradually to a maintenance level. Because of the inherent long action of the drug, patients may be controlled on convenient b.i.d. administration; some patients may be maintained on once a day administration. When trifluoperazine hydrochloride is administered by intramuscular injection, equivalent oral dosage may be substituted once symptoms have been controlled. Note: Although there is little likelihood of contact dermatitis due to the drug, persons with known sensitivity to phenothiazine drugs should avoid direct contact. Elderly Patients In general, dosages in the lower range are sufficient for most elderly patients. Since they appear to be more susceptible to hypotension and neuromuscular reactions, such patients should be observed closely. Dosage should be tailored to the individual, response carefully monitored, and dosage adjusted accordingly. Dosage should be increased more gradually in elderly patients. Non-Psychotic Anxiety Usual dosage is 1 mg or 2 mg twice daily. Do not administer at doses of more than 6 mg per day or for longer than 12 weeks. Schizophrenia Oral Usual starting dosage is 2 mg to 5 mg b.i.d. (Small or emaciated patients should always be started on the lower dosage.) Most patients will show optimum response on 15 mg or 20 mg daily, although a few may require 40 mg a day or more. Optimum therapeutic dosage levels should be reached within 2 or 3 weeks. DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION-SCHIZOPHRENIA IN CHILDREN Dosage should be adjusted to the weight of the child and severity of the symptoms. These dosages are for children, ages 6 to 12, who are hospitalized or under close supervision. Oral The starting dosage is 1 mg administered once a day or b.i.d. Dosage may be increased g
