SOURCE: DailyMed setid d31076b4-44ac-4f8b-8df6-5200cdbea12b
DRUG: zolpidem

DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION • Adult dose: 10 mg once daily immediately before bedtime ( 2.1 ) • Elderly/debilitated patients/hepatically impaired: 5 mg once daily immediately before bedtime ( 2.2 ) • Downward dosage adjustment may be necessary when used with CNS depressants ( 2.3 ) • Should not be taken with or immediately after a meal ( 2.4 ) DOSAGE FORMS AND STRENGTHS 5 mg and 10 mg tablets. Tablets not scored. ( 3 ) CONTRAINDICATIONS Known hypersensitivity to zolpidem tartrate or to any of the inactive ingredients in the formulation ( 4.1 ) WARNINGS AND PRECAUTIONS • Need to evaluate for co-morbid diagnosis: Reevaluate if insomnia persists after 7 to 10 days of use ( 5.1 ) • Severe anaphylactic/anaphylactoid reactions: Angioedema and anaphylaxis have been reported. Do not rechallenge if such reactions occur. ( 5.2 ) • Abnormal thinking, behavioral changes and complex behaviors: May include "sleep-driving" and hallucinations. Immediately evaluate any new onset behavioral changes. ( 5.3 ) • Depression: Worsening of depression or, suicidal thinking may occur. Prescribe the least amount feasible to avoid intentional overdose ( 5.3 , 5.6 ) • Withdrawal effects: Symptoms may occur with rapid dose reduction or discontinuation ( 5.4 , 9.3 ) • CNS depressant effects: Use can impair alertness and motor coordination. If used in combination with other CNS depressants, dose reductions may be needed due to additive effects. Do not use with alcohol ( 2.3 , 5.5 ) • Elderly/debilitated patients: Use lower dose due to impaired motor, cognitive performance and increased sensitivity ( 2.2 , 5.6 ) • Patients with hepatic impairment, mild to moderate COPD, impaired drug metabolism or hemodynamic responses, mild to moderate sleep apnea: Use with caution and monitor closely. ( 5.6 ) ADVERSE REACTIONS Most commonly observed adverse reactions were: Short-term (less than 10 nights): Drowsiness, dizziness, and diarrhea Long-term (28 - 35 nights): Dizziness and drugged feelings ( 6.1 ) To repo
